
@@PAGE 22@@
1 Understanding Multi-Agent Systems
This chapter covers:
 
The complexity challenge: understanding when individual AI models
become insufficient and why agents are needed
What defines an agent: core capabilities (reason, act, communicate,
adapt) and essential components (model, tools, memory)
Complex tasks that motivate multi-agent systems: planning, diverse
expertise, extensive context, and adaptive solutions
When to use (and when not to use) multi-agent approaches: Multi-agent
systems are not always the right solution; know when to use them
1.1 Introduction
Generative AI (GenAI) models today have demonstrated remarkable abilities
in modeling complex relationships within the vast amount of data on which
they are trained. For example, models such as GPT-4, Claude, Gemini, etc.
—also known as large language models (LLMs) (Vaswani et al. 2017), excel
at text processing tasks—for example: summarizing passages, extracting
entities, generating code, etc. Given the capabilities of these models, they
have now been applied directly within applications to solve tasks in various
industries. For instance, LLMs have been integrated into products for
generating marketing copy, reviewing legal documents for compliance,
providing advanced natural language understanding to chatbots and virtual
assistants, and assisting researchers in the scientific discovery process. And
adoption is growing rapidly across both individual users and enterprises. A
recent report states that 75% of knowledge workers are already using AI in
the workplace today (Microsoft AI Blog 2024), and a rising number of
startups are building applications that leverage these models to solve real-
world problems.
Quantifying the Shift to AI Agents

@@PAGE 23@@
It’s widely acknowledged that interest in AI agents is growing rapidly, but by how much? To
answer this question with concrete data, Chapter 14 demonstrates how to build a multi-agent
workflow that analyzes startup data from Y Combinator—one of North America’s largest
startup incubators.
The workflow we will design analyzes descriptions from 5,622 YCombinator companies. We
found that startups building AI agents grew from 6.1% in 2020 to 47.7% in 2025—a 7.8x
increase in just five years. This rapid growth signals where the industry sees opportunity:
moving beyond AI-assisted tools to fully autonomous systems that can handle complex, multi-
step tasks.
This analysis itself exemplifies the multi-agent workflow patterns we’ll explore in Chapter 2,
with the complete implementation detailed in Chapter 14. Feel free to jump ahead if you’re
curious about the methodology!

@@PAGE 24@@
Figure 1.1: Growth in Y Combinator startups building AI agents (2020-2025). This dramatic trend demonstrates the industry shift toward autonomous agentic AI systems.
However, as tasks become more complex —those that are long-running,
involve multiple steps, require consideration of various perspectives, and
necessitate exploration of a dynamic solution space—these models alone are
insufficient. To illustrate this progression and highlight the need for different
types of AI systems, consider the following task examples shown in
Table 1.1, representing three distinct levels of complexity:
Table 1.1: Task complexity levels: Model-level tasks require only information retrieval, agent-level tasks require planning and tool use, and multi-agent tasks require diverse expertise
and iterative development.
Complexity
Level
Task Example
Description
Model-Level “What is the height of the Eiffel
Tower?”
Direct information retrieval
from training data
Agent-Level “Tell me the stock price of
NVIDIA today.”
Requires 
current 
data,
planning, and tool use
Multi-Agent “Build a mobile application that
helps users view stock prices,
buy stock and file taxes.”
Involves multiple domains
of expertise and iterative
development
Definitions: Agents, Multi-Agent Systems, and Tools
 
Agent: An AI system that can reason, act with tools, communicate, and adapt
Multi-Agent System: Multiple agents working together, each with specialized capabilities
Tools: External capabilities like APIs, code execution, web search that extend agent abilities
Task 1 from Table  1.1 can be reliably addressed by retrieving general
knowledge facts from a model’s training data or existing systems such as
web search engines. This represents what a model can accomplish -
straightforward information retrieval without the need for planning, tools, or
adaptation.
Task 2, however, reveals where models alone become insufficient. The stock
price of NVIDIA today represents information that an LLM is unlikely to
have seen during training; thus, the results it generates are likely to be

@@PAGE 25@@
incorrect (hallucination). Task 2 requires understanding the query, planning
(e.g., decomposing the task into steps such as fetching current stock data and
analyzing the data to answer the question), action (executing each step using
tools like web search or APIs), and presentation of final results. This is
where we need an agent - a system that combines the reasoning capabilities
of these models with tools that enable them to act on our behalf. Current
GenAI applications explore this approach by building prescribed solution
pipelines that include Large Language Models (LLMs) which drive tools for
action.
Task 3 represents a level of complexity that goes beyond what even a
capable single agent can handle effectively. It involves multiple types of
expertise (interface design, Android development, API usage, integration
testing, etc.) and requires an iterative solution where actions are taken and
resulting outcomes determine the next steps toward a solution (e.g.,
retrieving appropriate SDK documentation, writing multiple versions of each
module in the app, testing them to identify errors, repairing and integrating
until a working application is crafted). This is where multiple agents
become essential - each bringing specialized capabilities while collaborating
to solve tasks that exceed any single system’s scope.
In this book, we will focus on exploring how to address these complex tasks
through the development of applications that implement elements of
planning, action and communication across multiple agents. In turn, these
applications hold potential to enable radically new, and general-purpose
digital interfaces, solve new classes of tasks or address existing tasks in a
manner that reduces human toil and effort.
The potential extends beyond generic task automation. When agents
understand user context (current activity, environment, recent interactions)
and preferences (explicitly defined settings and behavioral patterns), they
can provide highly personalized assistance with tasks such as scheduling
meetings, drafting email responses, booking flights, making e-commerce
purchases, and filing taxes.
To realize this potential, we need to understand the fundamental building
blocks: What exactly makes a system an “agent”? How do we build systems

@@PAGE 26@@
where multiple agents work together effectively? Let’s start by examining
these core concepts.
The progression from models to agents to multi-agent systems is visualized
in Figure 1.2.

@@PAGE 27@@

@@PAGE 28@@
Figure 1.2: Generative AI models (e.g., Large Language Models) can address a wide range of tasks including answering general knowledge questions, translating text, summarizing
passages, generating code, etc. However, as tasks become more complex, requiring reasoning, planning, and action, the limitations of these models become apparent. We can address
these increasingly complex tasks by providing LLMs with access to tools that enable them to act as agents on our behalf and enabling collaboration across multiple agents.
Single vs Multi-Agent: A Blurry Boundary
In practice, the boundary between “a single agent” and “a multi-agent system” is often blurry.
An agent might use tools that are themselves agents (as we’ll explore in Section 4.11 in Chapter
Chapter  4), or what appears as one agent to a user might internally coordinate multiple
specialized sub-agents working together.
Throughout this book, we illustrate explicit multi-agent architectures—where coordination
between agents is visible and intentional—because these patterns make design principles most
clear. However, the orchestration patterns, evaluation approaches, and ethical considerations we
explore apply broadly to any autonomous agentic system, regardless of whether its architecture
presents as “one” agent or “many.”
1.2 A Primer on Generative AI
Generative models are a subset of deep neural networks skilled at identifying
complex patterns within datasets, enabling them to generate new, similar
data points. These models are distinct from discriminative models, which
focus on differentiating between data types or classifying them. Generative
models can be trained on data from various modalities. For instance, models
trained on written text in human languages, such as the GPT series, are
known as Large Language Models (LLMs); those trained on images, like the
DALL-E series, are termed Image Generation Models (IGMs); and models
trained on both, such as GPT4-V, are often referred to as Large Multimodal
Models (LMMs) . This book will concentrate on Generative Models that
generate text output, including both large language models and large
multimodal models.
The fundamental concept for training generative models is relatively simple.
In the case of LLMs, these models are trained to predict the next word in a
sequence or to fill in blanks for masked or hidden sections of text - aka
sequence prediction . By applying this training objective to a sufficiently
large dataset, the models learn representations of the world as depicted

@@PAGE 29@@
through text. In turn, the models can leverage these representations in
generating text that is coherent, relevant, and contextually appropriate.
To apply these models to solve tasks, early efforts focused on framing
multiple tasks as sequence prediction problems. For example, to classify
text, a description of the classification problem is provided, followed by a
list of labels and a prompt asking, “<problem> <labels> Which of the provided
labels is the correct class?”. Similarly, to summarize a given passage, given a
prompt structured as “<passage> The summary of the passage above is ..”, the
model is induced to generate a summary of the passage. It turns out that
framing tasks as sequence prediction problems allows the models to leverage
knowledge gained during training to perform a wide range of tasks (e.g.,
language translation, sentiment analysis, question answering, dialogue
generation, named entity recognition, syntax parsing, code synthesis,
paraphrasing, grammar correction etc.) beyond their initial training
objectives. This background is important to understand the capabilities and
limitations of these models when applied to complex tasks. For example, the
reasoning capabilities observed in these models (e.g. 2 apples + 10 apples =
12 apples) are often limited to scenarios well represented in training data,
with failures to inherently generalize to rare or unseen scenarios (e.g. solving
linear equations in base 3).
The practice of creating sequences that increase the likelihood of
successfully completing a task is known as prompt engineering . Techniques
such as few-shot prompting (Brown et al. 2020), where examples of the task
and solution are included in the sequence, chain-of-thought prompting (J.
Wei et al. 2022), where examples of tasks broken down into solution steps
are included, and ReAct prompting (Yao et al. 2022), which combines
reasoning and acting in language models, have become leading prompt
engineering approaches. Beyond prompt engineering, fine-tuning models on
task-specific instruction data and explicitly collected human feedback data
(Ouyang et al. 2022) have proven to enhance model alignment - efforts
aimed at ensuring that generated outputs align with human intentions,
preferences, and values.
Finally, while LLMs can be instructed to generate text sequences that solve
tasks, the amount of text they can process at a time is fixed, constrained by
what is known as the context window . The context window size defines the

@@PAGE 30@@
maximum number of tokens (words or word pieces) the model can handle in
a single input and output sequence. This limit is dictated by the model’s
architecture, particularly its computational and memory constraints.
Understanding the context window is crucial for developers as it affects how
input data should be structured and how tasks should be framed. Strategies
like truncation, sliding window techniques, summarization, chunking, and
optimized prompt engineering are essential to operate effectively within
these constraints, maximizing the model’s potential in various applications
while balancing computational resources.
1.2.1 Getting Access to Generative AI Models
State-of-the-art models like GPT-4 or Claude are primarily accessible
through cloud-based APIs due to their computational requirements and
proprietary nature. Model providers including OpenAI, Anthropic, Google,
and Microsoft Azure offer API-level access through software development
kits (SDKs). The typical workflow involves creating a developer account,
configuring billing (most providers offer usage-based pricing with free tiers),
and generating API keys for authentication.
Throughout this book, we standardize on the OpenAI API specification for a
pragmatic reason: it has emerged as a de facto standard adopted across
multiple providers. The OpenAI SDK natively supports both OpenAI’s
services and Azure OpenAI—Microsoft’s managed enterprise deployment of
OpenAI models that offers additional security, compliance, and regional
availability guarantees. This standardization means code written for
OpenAI’s API can work with minimal changes across providers like
Together AI, Anyscale, and even local model deployments.
For local development and privacy-sensitive applications, tools like vLLM
(vLLM Team 2023) enable self-hosting of open-source models while
maintaining OpenAI API compatibility. This architectural pattern—where
different providers conform to a common API specification—allows the
multi-agent systems we build to remain agnostic to the underlying model
provider, whether cloud-based or locally deployed.

@@PAGE 31@@
1.3 Why Multiple Agents? Complex Task
Characteristics
While a single agent can effectively handle tasks like retrieving current stock
prices, even capable agents encounter fundamental limitations when facing
highly complex challenges. Consider our Task 3 from Table 1.1: “Build a
mobile application that helps users view stock prices, buy stock and file
taxes.” A single agent attempting this task would need to understand
application requirements across multiple domains, design user interfaces and
user experiences, write Android development code, integrate stock market
APIs, implement tax filing functionality, and handle testing, debugging, and
deployment.
Figure 1.3 illustrates the complexity of this multi-domain task.

@@PAGE 32@@

@@PAGE 33@@
Figure 1.3: Consider the following complex task - “build an app to view and purchase stock, as well as file appropriate taxes”. To address such a task, a multi-agent application must
derive a plan (e.g., gather requirements, design an interface, write android code etc), optionally delegate steps in the plan to various entities with specialized relevant capabilities (agents
and humans), communicate effectively and adapt (recover from errors, explore new approaches) to solve the task.
Even with access to powerful models and comprehensive tools, a single
agent faces several challenges. The extensive context required quickly
exceeds practical limits - existing studies (Liu et al. 2024) have shown that
while LLMs can process increasingly longer text, they are likely to attend to
instructions at the beginning and end of the text, while neglecting data in the
middle. More fundamentally, this task demands diverse types of expertise
that are difficult to encode effectively in a single agent’s instructions.
Complex tasks that motivate multi-agent approaches typically exhibit four
key characteristics, as shown in Figure 1.4. While the presence of any one of
these characteristics can increase the complexity of a task, it is often their
combination that presents the greatest opportunity for multi-agent systems.

@@PAGE 34@@
Figure 1.4: Complex tasks exhibit four key characteristics that make them suitable for multi-agent systems: Planning (requiring multiple steps and strategic thinking), Diverse Expertise
(needing specialized knowledge across different domains), Extensive Context (processing large amounts of information), and Adaptive Solutions (where solutions emerge from multiple
attempts). Tasks become increasingly complex when they combine multiple characteristics, making them ideal candidates for multi-agent approaches.
1.3.1 Planning
Complex tasks often require a high level plan, which involves decomposing
the task into steps that must be completed successfully. Given some context,
a plan prescribes a set of actions that should be executed to achieve some
target success state. This is a well-known and studied property in the

@@PAGE 35@@
robotics planning literature and we will borrow concepts from this domain
across this book.
1.3.2 Diverse Expertise
Decomposing complex tasks into multiple steps often results in steps that
can benefit from specific expertise. For instance, consider the app
development task where the objective is to build a mobile app for viewing
and purchasing stocks and filing taxes. This task may be broken down into
steps such as analyzing app requirements, designing the user interface,
implementing required functionalities, integrating necessary APIs for stock
data and tax filing, and testing and deploying the app. In turn, these tasks
map into specific roles that can be addressed by dedicated agents (e.g. a UX
agent, Android App agent etc), each possessing specialized knowledge and
skills.
The separation of expertise allows for a separation-of-concerns approach
that single-agent systems may struggle to achieve following a generic
instruction set. From the application development perspective, creating
agents with specific directives provides a useful abstraction for cleanly
mapping responsibilities to specific entities, enabling domain-driven design
of applications.
1.3.3 Extensive Context
Complex tasks often require extensive context that need to be processed to
solve the task. For example, in our app development task, the agents may
conduct web search queries as well as ask for human feedback to assemble
requirements, across multiple turns to assemble the right initial context. Such
lengthy instructions or context present a significant challenge for single-
agent systems. Existing studies (Liu et al. 2024) have shown that while
LLMs can process increasingly longer text, they are likely to attend to
instructions at the beginning and end of the text, while neglecting data in the
middle. This perspective is also informed by theories from cognitive science,
such as cognitive load theory (Sweller 1988), which suggests that the human
brain has a limited working memory capacity. When presented with lengthy
or underspecified instructions, this capacity becomes overwhelmed, leading
to decreased comprehension and performance.

@@PAGE 36@@
A multi-agent perspective can help address this limitation by selective
context provisioning - i.e., only sections of available context (for example, a
history of actions performed so far) relevant to a task are provided to an
agent focused on that task. By structuring instructions and managing context
in a way that minimizes unnecessary cognitive load, we can significantly
improve task performance in AI systems.
1.3.4 Adaptive Solutions
Complex tasks are often situated in dynamic environments where the exact
solution is unknown or uncertain until some actions are taken. For example,
specific data sources may be unavailable at a given time requiring the
exploration of other data sources or each action may have unexpected side
effects etc. For example, in the app development task, the initial request to
the API may fail (e.g., due to a network issue, incorrect argument format or
general changes to the API), requiring the agent to adapt by retrying the
request with different parameters based on the feedback (e.g., error message
received from the API request or seeking explicit human assistance). In these
cases, the solution emerges from adaptation - iteratively reasoning across
some initial plan, actions and outcomes of agents as they solve the task.
This property is also inspired by insights from metacognition studies, which
suggest that an agent’s awareness and regulation of their own cognitive
processes can significantly influence the problem-solving process.
Metacognitive skills, which are challenging for single-agent systems today,
enable agents to reflect on, evaluate, and adjust their strategies in real-time,
leading to more adaptive and potentially innovative solutions within the
emergent framework of multi-agent collaboration.
Given these adaptive requirements, it becomes more challenging to write
deterministic pipelines (e.g., specific prompts, tools), hence the need for
agents that can self-orchestrate (with some autonomy) to address the task.
Table 1.2 shows some examples of complex tasks and how they map to each
of complex task properties.
Table 1.2: Examples of complex tasks and their defining characteristics: Planning, Diverse Expertise, Extensive Context, and Adaptive Solutions.

@@PAGE 37@@
Task
Planning
Diverse
Expertise
Extensive
Context
Adaptive
Solutions
Web 
App
Development
Requirements,
design,
compliance,
APIs
Developers,
designers,
security, data
experts
Legacy
systems,
docs,
workflows,
standards
Security
updates,
feedback,
changes
Financial
Reporting
Data collection,
analysis,
reporting
Analysts,
statisticians,
writers,
domain
experts
Market data,
tools,
standards,
trends
New sources,
feedback,
market shifts
Tax Filing
Data gathering,
analysis, filing,
compliance
Tax advisors,
analysts, legal,
jurisdiction
experts
Records, tax
codes,
regulations,
structures
Law
changes,
queries,
corrections
Presentation
Design
Content review,
design,
interactivity
Designers,
editors,
presentation
experts
Content,
audience,
goals,
guidelines
Feedback,
content
updates,
format
changes
Furthermore, our analysis of real world data from YCombinator reveals that
47.7% of Y Combinator startups building AI agents in 2025 are focused on
the following domains: productivity (25.5%), software (18.4%), finance
(15.6%), health (11.6%), and e commerce (6.8%) where planning and
diverse expertise are essential. See the in-depth analysis in Chapter 14.
Reflecting on these patterns provides context for understanding when and
why a multi-agent approach is beneficial. When tasks are complex, dynamic,
and require diverse expertise, a multi-agent approach can offer the
adaptability and collaborative problem-solving capabilities necessary to
manage these tasks effectively. Recent research studies have also highlighted
benefits of multi-agent approaches. For instance, (Du et al. 2023) find that a
society of mind approach (Minsky 1986) - a theory proposing that human
intelligence arises from the interaction of multiple simple agents working
together - improves reasoning and factuality when multiple agents debate

@@PAGE 38@@
outcomes over multiple rounds of conversation turns. Similarly, (Liang et al.
2023) demonstrate that using multiple agents with separate roles (e.g., agents
that perform a task and agents that adjudicate the quality of the task) can
improve the diversity and quality of generated outcomes.
1.4 What is an Agent?
Definitions of agents vary across the AI literature, from early concepts in
robotics to more recent ideas around entities driven by AI models. A good
starting point is the classic work of Russell and Norvig (Russell and Norvig
2020) that define an agent as anything that perceives its environment
through sensors and acts upon that environment through actuators, operating
through an agent function that maps perceptions to actions. This classical
definition emphasizes perception-action loops driven by logical reasoning.
To illustrate this classical approach, consider a robotic vacuum cleaner: it
perceives its environment through sensors (detecting obstacles, dirt levels,
battery status), applies logical rules (if obstacle detected, turn; if dirt
detected, increase suction; if battery low, return to dock), and acts through
actuators (motors for movement, suction mechanisms, brush rotation). The
agent function follows predetermined logic: obstacle -> avoid, dirt -> clean,
low battery -> recharge. This creates a continuous perception-action loop
where each sensor reading triggers specific programmed responses.
We can build on this foundation but extend it for the generative AI era.
While classical agents operate through predefined functions, generative AI
agents maintain the same perception-action cycle but add sophisticated
capabilities: complex reasoning powered by large language models, dynamic
tool use, natural language communication, and adaptive behavior based on
outcomes. These enhanced capabilities make them particularly suitable for
the collaborative problem-solving we explore in this book.
For this book, we define agents as entities that can reason, act,
communicate, and adapt to solve problems. Consider our NVIDIA stock
price example (Task 2 from Table 1.1): an effective agent must understand
the information request, reason about obtaining current stock data, take
action using appropriate tools (web search or financial APIs), and adapt if

@@PAGE 39@@
the initial approach fails. This adaptation might involve trying alternative
data sources or adjusting the query strategy.
The core components of an agent are shown in Figure 1.5.

@@PAGE 40@@

@@PAGE 41@@
Figure 1.5: An agent is a software entity that possesses core components - a generative AI model that enables reasoning, tools that enable the agent to act, and memory that enables the
agent to recall and reuse information.
1.4.1 Core Capabilities
An agent possesses four fundamental capabilities that distinguish it from
basic models or traditional programs:
Reason: Agents can synthesize new information by applying rules or logic
to available context. This reasoning may be deductive, inductive, or
abductive and can be driven by a Generative AI model, custom processing
functions, or a combination of both. In our stock price example, reasoning
involves understanding that “NVIDIA today” requires current market data,
not historical information from training data.
Act: Agents can take concrete actions to affect their environment or gather
information. This goes beyond generating text responses - agents can
execute code, call APIs, search the web, or interact with external systems.
For the stock price task, acting means actually calling a financial data API or
performing a web search to retrieve current pricing information.
Communicate: Agents can effectively exchange information with users,
other agents, and external systems. This includes understanding natural
language inputs, formatting appropriate responses, and knowing when and
how to request additional information or clarification.
Adapt: Agents can modify their approach based on feedback, changing
conditions, or new information. If an initial API call fails due to rate
limiting, an effective agent might wait and retry, switch to an alternative data
source, or adjust its approach based on the error message received.
1.4.2 How Agents Work
Agents operate through a fundamental action-perception loop shown in
Figure  1.6. Unlike models that generate single responses, agents work
through iterative cycles—taking action, perceiving results, and adapting
based on outcomes until the task is resolved. Multi-agent systems build upon

@@PAGE 42@@
this principle, with multiple agents running coordinated action-perception
cycles to solve complex tasks that exceed any single agent’s capabilities.

@@PAGE 43@@

@@PAGE 44@@
Figure 1.6: The agent action-perception loop: Agents operate through iterative cycles where they take action (such as calling an API), perceive the results (processing the response), and
adapt their approach based on outcomes. When successful, agents provide natural language responses; when errors occur, they may retry with different parameters or inform users of
limitations.
These capabilities are enabled by the three core components shown in
Figure 1.5 working together:
1.4.2.1 Model
The reasoning engine that enables decision-making and planning. This is
typically a large language model (LLM) or large multimodal model (LMM)
that can understand context, generate plans, and determine appropriate
actions. The model serves as the “brain” of the agent, processing inputs and
deciding what to do next.
For agents to successfully accomplish tasks, they must reason over the task
state and determine the appropriate actions to take. This core decision-
making capability can be driven by generative AI models, predefined logic,
or explicit human input. Besides generative AI models, agents can also make
use of custom logic (e.g., logic to call an API whenever a message is
received based on some heuristics), or explicit human input to drive their
actions and reasoning. Implementations that intelligently combine multiple
drivers—using generative AI models to reason over the task state and
requesting just-in-time human input to provide feedback—can significantly
enhance the quality and adaptability of agent responses.
1.4.2.2 Tools
Tools, also known as skills or plugins, are specific implementations of logic
designed to carry out particular tasks. They serve as the primary method for
agents to act on tasks. Tools can be grouped into two categories: general-
purpose tools and domain-specific tools.
General-purpose tools enable a broad range of capabilities, such as a code
executor that allows agents to complete any task expressible as code, or a UI
interface driver that allows agents to carry out tasks formulated as a
sequence of UI interactions. In contrast, domain-specific tools are designed
to address a specific task or a set of related tasks (e.g., calling a weather API

@@PAGE 45@@
with particular parameters). Providing agents with access to tools can
significantly impact the range (diversity) and complexity of tasks that agents
can address.
1.4.2.3 Memory
For agents to effectively perform tasks and improve over time, they need
memory—the ability to recall and reuse information from past interactions.
This enables agents to learn from experience and apply lessons to future
tasks.
Short-Term Memory acts as working memory for the current task, tracking
recent actions, conversation history, and temporary information needed to
complete the immediate objective. In multi-agent systems, short-term
memory often includes shared context so agents can coordinate effectively.
Long-Term Memory stores accumulated knowledge, successful strategies,
and learned patterns that persist across different tasks and sessions. This
allows agents to build expertise over time and apply past experience to new
situations.
Beyond these temporal distinctions, memory systems also differ in who
controls them. Application-managed memory is controlled by the developer
—information is stored and retrieved automatically by the application code
based on predefined strategies. Agent-managed memory gives agents direct
control—they explicitly decide what to store, when to retrieve information,
and how to organize their knowledge base through tools. This distinction
between application-controlled and agent-controlled memory proves
important when building agents that need to actively curate their own
knowledge. We explore these memory architectures and the tradeoffs
between them in Section 4.8.
These components work together in a continuous cycle: the model reasons
about the current state and determines what action to take, selects and uses
appropriate tools to execute that action, observes the results, updates its
memory with new information, and adapts its approach for the next step.
Conversational Programming

@@PAGE 46@@
The action-perception loop described above raises a practical question: how do we implement
such iterative reasoning and action-taking in code?
A powerful approach is conversational programming , where each step in the agent cycle—
reasoning, acting, and processing results—is represented as messages in a conversation. This
aligns naturally with chat-fine-tuned models, which are designed to process conversation
histories and generate contextually appropriate responses.
This paradigm enables agents to seamlessly blend natural language interaction with concrete
actions like code execution or API calls, and forms the foundation for multi-agent frameworks
like AutoGen (Wu et al. (2023)), where agents coordinate through message passing—a pattern
we’ll explore in detail in later chapters.
1.4.3 Agent vs. Model: A Clear Distinction
While both agents and models can process natural language and generate
responses, agents differ fundamentally in their ability to interact with the
world beyond text generation:
 
Models excel at text processing, analysis, and generation based on their
training data
Agents can take actions, use tools, maintain context across interactions,
and adapt their behavior based on results
Our NVIDIA stock price example (Task 2 from Table  1.1) perfectly
illustrates this distinction: a model might generate a plausible-sounding but
potentially incorrect stock price based on its training data, while an agent
would recognize the need for current information, use appropriate tools to
fetch real-time data, and provide an accurate, up-to-date response.
This ability to move beyond text generation into action-taking and
adaptation is what makes agents powerful tools for addressing complex,
real-world tasks that require more than just information synthesis.
1.5 What is a Multi-Agent System?

@@PAGE 47@@
Building on our agent definition, we define multi-agent systems as
applications that involve a group of agents, each with diverse capabilities
and specialized objectives, collaborating to solve tasks. While these agents
could be embodied in physical robots, this book focuses on agents that exist
primarily in the digital world.
As shown in Figure 1.7, multi-agent systems can be organized through two
distinct approaches.

@@PAGE 48@@

@@PAGE 49@@
Figure 1.7: Two approaches to multi-agent orchestration: predefined workflows (left) versus AI-driven autonomous orchestration (right). The key difference lies in whether control flow
is predetermined or emerges dynamically from AI-driven decisions at runtime.
Multi-Agent System
A multi-agent system (or multi-agent application) is a collection of agents that collaborate to
solve tasks. Each agent maintains specific capabilities—reasoning, acting, and communicating
—and can adapt to changes in the task or environment. The key distinguishing feature of multi-
agent systems is their orchestration mechanisms: the patterns that determine how agents
communicate, when they act, and how they share data and control flow during task execution.
Orchestration
Across this book, we will repeatedly use the term orchestration and it is rather helpful to define
what we mean by the term. Orchestration refers to the mechanisms and patterns that enable
multiple agents to work together effectively toward shared goals. This encompasses two main
aspects - how they share information, and who controls the flow of execution (the order in
which they act).
While academic literature and emerging practices sometimes uses “coordination” and
“orchestration” interchangeably, we use “orchestration” as the primary term throughout this
book to align with industry standards and common usage in AI/ML frameworks.
As shown in Figure 1.7, multi-agent systems can be organized through two
distinct approaches. Multi-agent workflows (left) use predefined control
flow where agents follow established sequences and handoffs, creating
predictable and reliable processes. Autonomous multi-agent systems (right)
use AI-driven orchestration where the control flow is determined
dynamically at runtime, enabling adaptive responses to complex or
unpredictable tasks. While both approaches use agents with the same core
anatomy—model, memory, and tools—they differ fundamentally in how
orchestration decisions are made.
1.5.1 Two Approaches to Multi-Agent Orchestration
Multi-agent systems can be organized through two fundamentally different
approaches, each suited to different types of problems:

@@PAGE 50@@
Multi-Agent Workflows (Defined Orchestration) These systems follow
pre-defined collaboration patterns where each agent has clearly specified
roles, responsibilities, and handoff points. The orchestration logic is
explicitly programmed, creating predictable and repeatable processes. For
example, a document processing workflow might have agents that specialize
in text extraction, analysis, and formatting, working in a predetermined
sequence with defined inputs and outputs for each stage.
Autonomous Multi-Agent Orchestration (AI-Driven Orchestration)
These systems use AI models to drive orchestration decisions, allowing
agents to dynamically negotiate responsibilities and adapt their collaboration
based on task requirements and intermediate results. The orchestration
emerges from agent interactions rather than being pre-programmed. This
approach is particularly valuable for complex tasks where the optimal
solution strategy cannot be predetermined and must evolve through
exploration and adaptation.
The choice between these approaches directly impacts system behavior:
workflows provide predictability and reliability, while autonomous systems
offer adaptability and innovation. We explore the specific patterns within
each approach in detail in Chapter 2, including sequential and supervisor
patterns for workflows, and group chat and handoff patterns for autonomous
systems.
An Adaptive Multi-Agent Application Example
Consider this scenario: You need to create an application that books flights to specific
destinations at the best price. However, your target airline, specialairlines.com, doesn’t offer an
API—only a web interface and mobile app designed for human users.
This creates several challenges beyond simply finding and booking flights:
Interface Navigation: The system must understand interface content (HTML elements, visual
layouts), determine appropriate actions (clicking buttons, filling forms), and verify success
(checking for confirmation messages). Each action changes the interface state, affecting
subsequent possible actions.
Dynamic Adaptation: The system must handle interface changes (button relocations, updated
form fields) and recover from errors (failed bookings, network issues) through iterative

@@PAGE 51@@
problem-solving.
Multi-Agent Orchestration: Success requires collaboration between specialized agents—
perhaps a navigation agent for interface interaction, a payment agent for transactions, and a
monitoring agent for verification—along with communication with human users when
assistance is needed.
This scenario illustrates a task where the solution cannot be predetermined but must emerge
through a series of adaptive actions. It exemplifies the complex problems that require
reasoning, acting, adapting, and communicating across multiple agents—tasks that exceed the
capabilities of current single-agent systems and represent ideal candidates for multi-agent
approaches.
1.6 Why Now?
Multiple factors highlight the importance of multi-agent Generative AI
applications today, including advances in AI reasoning capabilities,
economic opportunities through time arbitrage, self-improving systems,
opportunities to tackle complex tasks, the increasing demand for reliable
automation, platform economics, and the growing need for ethical AI
deployment. These elements emphasize the significance of multi-agent
systems in addressing contemporary challenges.
1.6.1 Advances in Generative AI Reasoning Capabilities
The general premise of multi-agent systems is not new. This topic has been
extensively researched both from the perspective of understanding how
humans collaborate to solve tasks (collective intelligence, crowdsourcing) as
well as how artificial agents collaborate with themselves and humans (robot
planning, robot navigation, human-robot collaboration, swarm intelligence,
etc.). However, the development of artificial agents has been limited due to
the lack of a reasoning engine (or artificial brain) that can adapt to context,
synthesize plans that address tasks, and drive actions required as part of such
plans. Recent advances in the demonstrated reasoning capabilities of
Generative AI models, such as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, change that status quo
and now provide a critical component that enables new experiments and
progress in creating truly autonomous multi-agent systems.

@@PAGE 52@@
1.6.2 Economic Value Through Time Arbitrage
Multi-agent systems offer compelling economic advantages through time
arbitrage . While an agent might take longer to complete a task than a human
in absolute terms, the economics favor delegation when considering the
value of human attention. For example, a task that costs you $30-100 of time
(1 hour at your hourly value) might cost $1-2 for an agent to complete over
2-3 hours. As GenAI inference costs continue to drop while human time
becomes more valuable, this equation only improves.
1.6.3 The Promise of Self-Improving Systems
Unlike traditional software that requires engineering effort to improve,
multi-agent systems can automatically benefit from advances in underlying
AI models. This creates a unique opportunity to build systems that
compound in value over time with minimal additional investment.
Note
Across my career, I have seen multiple instances where the performance of systems where
capabilities are delegated to AI agents improve as the underlying model improves. A good
example is my work with LIDA (Dibia (2023)) - a workflow based multi-iagent system for
automatically generating visualizatons from data. The initial version of this system built with
the davinci model family from openai had a 20% error rate on the initial evaluation harness.
Simply switching to GPT 3.5 turbo which became available a few months after led to an error
rate reduction form 20% to 3% across the board. I still see these sorts of system level
improvements as new advanced models become available.
1.6.4 Opportunity to Address Tacit Knowledge Tasks
Many repetitive problems today have been difficult to automate or support
with reliable software tools. Existing research suggests that some of the
automation challenges arise because these tasks require tacit knowledge — a
form of knowledge that is challenging to articulate or codify but more
readily transferred through experience or practice. However, groups of
agents enabled by LLMs that encode vast amounts of knowledge and can
collaborate with humans and other agents provide a new opportunity to

@@PAGE 53@@
address these complex tasks. This approach can help automate tasks that
were previously considered infeasible to automate, thus reducing human
effort and potentially errors.
1.6.5 Increasing Demand for Reliable Automation
Businesses and individuals seek AI solutions that can autonomously execute
sophisticated tasks while maintaining high levels of reliability and safety.
Humans should still remain in the oversight loop, ensuring that the
automated solutions reliably and safely deliver cost and effort savings.
Multi-agent systems can provide the reliability and adaptability needed for
complex, real-world automation challenges.
1.6.6 Platform Economics and Integration Value
Multi-agent systems enable “everything app” economics - creating value
through integration rather than specialized point solutions. This allows for
capturing user preferences, learning across domains, and reducing switching
costs. The same system can handle diverse tasks without requiring
specialized configuration or domain knowledge from users. Platform
economics benefits include creating value through integration, saving time
by being the platform and avoiding switching costs, and the ability to
capture user preferences, learn, and become even more valuable over time.
1.6.7 Ethical AI Deployment
As AI deployment expands and generative AI models are applied across
various problem domains, the need for responsible, secure, and human-
centric multi-agent frameworks becomes increasingly critical. Ensuring
ethical considerations are met in AI development and deployment helps to
build trust in these systems and reduces potential negative consequences.
Distributed Agents: Agents that live across multiple organizational boundaries
Depending on the background of an engineer, the term “multi-agent systems” can evoke
different mental models. For some, the focus is on software entities that collaborate within a
single application/thread/process with similar permission structures. For others, the focus is on
a distributed internet of agents where agents are primarily unaware of each other (requiring

@@PAGE 54@@
some discovery protocol), permissions (security and access) are markedly different, and
communication must support both synchronous and asynchronous modes at scale.
In this book, we will focus primarily on the first scenario. While the second is important, it is
frequently the case that an early focus on distributed agents is overengineering—an increase in
complexity—and there are standard methods that can help us transition to a distributed setup as
the need arises. In the version 0.4 rewrite/redesign of AutoGen, we specifically provided a
runtime concept that could be single process or distributed, allowing developers to create agents
that could run in either mode without changing the agent logic itself. We found that the vast
majority of use cases were well served by single process/thread applications.
Specifically, in a later chapter (see chapter Chapter 12), we will discuss emerging protocols for
distributed agent-to-agent communication, the design choices, and how existing agents can be
adapted to work in a distributed setting.
1.7 
Choosing 
the 
Right 
AI 
Agent
Architecture
Building AI applications requires choosing the right level of complexity
from a spectrum of architectures: simple models for text generation, single
agents 
for 
action-taking, 
multi-agent 
workflows 
for 
structured
deterministic collaboration, and autonomous multi-agent systems for
exploratory problem-solving. While autonomous multi-agent systems offer
the most sophisticated capabilities, they introduce significant challenges
including unpredictable outcomes, reproducibility issues across model
versions, increased error potential, and additional cost and latency.
The decision framework shown in Figure  1.8 helps you select the
appropriate architecture by following a logical progression of questions
about your task requirements.

@@PAGE 55@@

@@PAGE 56@@
Figure 1.8: Decision framework for choosing the right AI agent architecture based on task requirements.
1.7.1 Decision Framework
The choice of architecture follows a logical progression based on your task
characteristics.
Start with the fundamental question: Does your task require actions
beyond text generation? If your task involves only text processing, analysis,
or generation—such as answering questions from training data, document
summarization, or code generation from specifications—then directly calling
an AI model to generate a response is sufficient.
For tasks requiring action-taking, the next consideration is whether your
solution approach is well-known and can be expressed as a workflow. When
you have a clear understanding of the steps needed and how they should be
executed, you’re choosing between single agents and multi-agent workflows.
If your workflow benefits from specialized expertise—where different
parts of the task require distinct domain knowledge—a multi-agent
workflow is appropriate. This approach works best when the collaboration
pattern between specialized agents is well-understood and each agent’s role
and handoffs follow established processes. For example, financial analysis
pipelines require separate market data, risk assessment, and portfolio
optimization agents working in a defined sequence. However, if the task can
be handled effectively by one type of expertise, a single agent with the
necessary tools is more efficient.
For tasks where the solution approach is not well-defined, you’re
choosing between single agents and autonomous multi-agent systems based
on the level of exploration required. If the task involves known action
sequences but requires relatively simple action-perception loops—such as
API calls with result validation—a single agent is suitable. However,
autonomous multi-agent systems become necessary when solutions emerge
through exploration and dynamic agent interaction, when agents must be
defined and improved independently, when agents must adapt their
collaboration based on intermediate results, or when performance improves
through iterative learning from successes and failures. For example,

@@PAGE 57@@
application 
development 
where 
requirements 
and 
implementation
approaches evolve through experimentation.
A guiding principle: Choose the simplest architecture that effectively
addresses your requirements. Each level of sophistication introduces
additional complexity, development time, and potential failure points while
offering greater capability and adaptability. When in doubt, start simple and
evolve your architecture as you better understand your task’s true
requirements.
These principles are validated by comprehensive evaluation results in
Section 10.6. When comparing direct model calls, single agents with tools,
and multi-agent systems across diverse task types, the data confirms that
direct model calls excel on simple reasoning tasks (9.7/10 with 24x better
token efficiency than multi-agent), while multi-agent systems justify their
overhead only when tasks require tool coordination or specialized expertise.
For example, research tasks requiring web search show direct models
scoring 3.2/10 compared to tool-enabled agents scoring 9.0/10—
demonstrating when architectural complexity becomes necessary.
1.8 
Building Your 
First 
Multi-Agent
System
Oh boy! If you have read this far, you are probably excited to get your hands
dirty and start building your first agent. Starting in Chapter  4, we will
collaboratively build a multi-agent library called picoagents from scratch.
As a quick sneak peek, let us take a look at some of the functionality we will
build and also use this as an opportunity to run your first multiagent
application by creating a simple poet-critic collaboration system step by
step. We will define two agents - a poet that writes haikus and a critic that
provides feedback on the quality of poems. The idea is that feedback from
the critic can iteratively improve the poet’s output.
1.8.1 Environment Setup

@@PAGE 58@@
The first thing we will need to do before we write and run any code is to
ensure we have our python environment setup correctly. Luckily, we only
need to do this once and can reuse the same environment for all the
examples in this book.
I always recommend using a virtual environment to manage dependencies -
this means we want to ensure that we install the right version of python that
we need, and that all the libraries we install are isolated from other projects
on the same machine. You can create one using venv (built-in with Python) or
conda if you prefer. Here, we’ll use venv for simplicity.
# Create and activate a virtual environment
python -m venv multiagent_env
source multiagent_env/bin/activate  
# On Windows: multiagent_env\Scripts\activate 
pip install picoagents # install from PyPI
1.8.2 Step 1: Import and Model Setup
Let’s start with the essential imports (Agent and OpenAIChatCompletionClient
classes).
import asyncio
from picoagents import Agent
from picoagents.llm import OpenAIChatCompletionClient
import os
Now, we need to setup our language model client. Here, we will use
OpenAI’s GPT-4.1-mini model via the OpenAIChatCompletionClient class. We can
also use other model clients such as AzureOpenAIChatCompletionClient if we want
to use Azure OpenAI service - or really any other model client that conforms
to the expected interface.
# Setup the language model client
client = OpenAIChatCompletionClient(
    model="gpt-4.1-mini",

@@PAGE 59@@
    api_key=os.getenv("OPENAI_API_KEY")
)
Note that you will need to either pass in your API key directly or set it as an
environment variable named OPENAI_API_KEY (recommended).
1.8.3 Step 2: Create Your First Agent
Next, let’s create a single agent with a rather simple task - generate a haiku
(a poem with a 5-7-5 syllable structure):
# Create a haiku poet
poet = Agent(
    name="poet",
    description="Haiku poet.",
    instructions="You are a haiku poet.",
    model_client=client
)
While we are building up towards a multi-agent system, it is always a good
idea to test each component as you build it. Let’s test our poet agent:
# Test the poet
async def test_poet():
    response = await poet.run("Write a haiku about cherry blossoms in spring")
    print(f"Poet says: {response}")
asyncio.run(test_poet())
Running this code produces output similar to:
[user] 12:09:14 | Write a haiku about cherry blossoms in spring
[poet] 12:09:16 | Petals softly fall,
Whispers drift on warm spring breeze,
Life wakes in colors.
[usage] duration: 2.0s, tokens: in:26, out:20 | finish: stop

@@PAGE 60@@
The output shows the conversation history (user request and agent response)
followed by usage statistics. The run() method waits for the complete
response before returning. For real-time updates as the agent works, you can
use run_stream() instead—we’ll explore streaming in detail in Chapter 4.
1.8.4 Step 3: Add a Critic Agent
Let’s create a poetry critic to provide feedback:
# Create a poetry critic
critic = Agent(
    name="critic", 
    description="Poetry critic who provides constructive feedback on haikus.", 
    instructions="You are a haiku critic. \
        When you see a haiku, provide 2-3 specific, actionable \
        suggestions for improvement. . Be constructive and brief. \
        If satisfied with the haiku, respond with 'APPROVED'",
    model_client=client
)
Similarly, we can also test our critic agent:
# Test the critic
async def test_critic():
    haiku = ("Cherry blossoms fall\n"
             "Petals dancing in spring breeze\n"
             "Nature's gentle song")
    response = await critic.run(f"Please critique this haiku: {haiku}")
    print(f"Critic says: {response}")
asyncio.run(test_critic())
1.8.5 Step 4: Round-Robin Orchestration
Now for the exciting part - let’s make them collaborate using round-robin
orchestration (a simple pattern where agents address tasks by taking turns in
a shared conversation until a termination condition is met):

@@PAGE 61@@
from picoagents.orchestration import RoundRobinOrchestrator 
from picoagents.termination import MaxMessageTermination, TextMentionTermination
# Create termination conditions
termination = (MaxMessageTermination(max_messages=8) | 
               TextMentionTermination(text="APPROVED"))
# Create the orchestrator
orchestrator = RoundRobinOrchestrator(
    agents=[poet, critic],
    termination=termination,
    max_iterations=4
)
Now, lets run the orchestrator with a task:
# Run orchestration
async def run_orchestration():
    task = "Write a haiku about cherry blossoms in spring" 
    stream = orchestrator.run_stream(task)
    async for message in stream:
        print(f"{message}")
asyncio.run(run_orchestration())
The RoundRobinOrchestrator manages a turn-taking loop, while termination
conditions ensure the conversation concludes appropriately - here either
reaching the maximum number of messages or the critic approving the haiku
with a specific text mentioned.
The output of the code above looks like the following:
🎯 Task: Write a haiku about cherry blossoms in spring
🔄 Poet and Critic collaboration:
 
[user]: 22:58:25
==================================================
Write a haiku about cherry blossoms in spring  

@@PAGE 62@@
[poet]: 22:58:27
==================================================
Petals drift like dreams,  
Whispers of a fleeting past,  
Spring's soft blush unfolds.    
[critic]: 22:58:28
==================================================
1. Consider incorporating a more vivid description of the cherry 
   blossoms to strengthen the imagery—what do they look or smell like?...
APPROVED  
🏁 RoundRobinOrchestrator: duration: 3.6s, tokens: in:232, out:121, 
calls: 2 . Stop reason: Text mention found: 'APPROVED'
Congratulations - you just built and ran your first multi-agent app!
Working Code: First Multi-Agent System
The complete working example for this haiku system is available in examples/orchestration.
Run it with python round-robin.py or add the --web flag to launch the Web UI.
1.8.6 Visualizing Your Multi-Agent System
Watching agents collaborate through console output is helpful, but seeing the
interaction visually makes debugging and understanding much easier.
PicoAgents includes a web interface that lets you interact with your multi-
agent system through a browser.
To launch the haiku system with a web interface, wrap the orchestrator with
the serve() function:
from picoagents.webui import serve
# Use the orchestrator we created above
serve(entities=[orchestrator], port=8070, auto_open=True)

@@PAGE 63@@
This single line starts a web server with a complete interface where you can
see the conversation unfold between the poet and critic agents, inspect
individual messages, and explore the orchestration pattern in real time
(Figure 1.9).
Figure 1.9: PicoAgents Web UI showing the round-robin orchestrator with poet and critic agents. The interface displays participating agents, termination conditions, the conversation
flow, and a debug panel for inspecting agent interactions.
The Web UI provides several useful features: view message history between
agents, inspect tool calls and responses, monitor termination conditions, and

@@PAGE 64@@
debug multi-agent interactions. We will explore how to build similar web
interfaces that integrate agents and orchestrators from scratch in Chapter 8.
Depending on your level of expertise with AI models, you might have
questions - how is the 
Agent class implemented? How does the
RoundRobinOrchestrator work? What is a model_client? How do termination
conditions work? Don’t worry - we will explore all these components - we
will build them up from scratch in chapter Chapter  4 and subsequent
chapters.
1.9 Summary
In summary, here are the key takeaways from this chapter:
 
The Complexity Challenge: Generative AI models excel at many tasks
but face limitations as complexity increases. Tasks requiring reasoning,
planning, and action beyond text generation need agents - systems that
combine models with tools and can take actions in the world.
Agent Definition and Components: Agents are entities that can reason
(synthesize information using logic), act (take concrete actions using
tools), communicate (exchange information effectively), and adapt
(modify approaches based on feedback). These capabilities are enabled
by three core components working together: a model (reasoning engine,
typically an LLM), tools (enable action-taking), and memory (short-
term for immediate tasks, long-term for accumulated knowledge and
experiences).
Complex Task Characteristics: Multi-agent systems are most
beneficial for tasks exhibiting four key characteristics: requiring
planning (multi-step decomposition), needing diverse expertise
(specialized knowledge domains), involving extensive context (large
amounts of information), and requiring adaptive solutions (dynamic
environments where solutions emerge iteratively).
Decision Framework: Use multi-agent approaches when tasks are
complex, require diverse expertise, involve dynamic environments, or

@@PAGE 65@@
benefit from adaptation. Avoid them for simple, deterministic tasks with
minimal expertise diversity or static environments.
Current Opportunity: Multiple factors make this an opportune time
for multi-agent system development: advances in generative AI
reasoning capabilities providing the foundation for autonomous agents,
economic value through time arbitrage (agents cost $1-2 vs $30-100
human time), self-improving systems that benefit from AI model
advances without re-engineering, opportunities to address previously
unautomatable tacit knowledge tasks, increasing demand for reliable
automation, platform economics enabling “everything app” integration
value, and the need for ethical AI deployment frameworks.
OceanofPDF.com
