
@@PAGE 66@@
2 Multi-Agent Patterns
This chapter covers:
 
A taxonomy of multi-agent orchestration patterns: understanding the
spectrum from explicit workflow control to autonomous emergent
orchestration
Workflow patterns: sequential, conditional, parallel, and supervisor
patterns with developer-defined execution paths and predictable
behavior
Autonomous patterns: group chat, handoff, and hierarchical patterns
where agents determine orchestration through runtime reasoning and
communication
Pattern selection guidance: comparing trade-offs between reliability,
autonomy, and complexity to choose the right approach for your task
As a software engineer, you’ve likely encountered patterns throughout your
career. Whether learning design patterns like singleton and observer in
computer science courses, or discovering algorithmic patterns like two-
pointer and sliding window techniques while preparing for interviews, the
underlying principle remains consistent: through experimentation and
practice, our field identifies what works best and codifies these insights into
reusable solutions.
Patterns provide structure for managing complexity and prevent us from
reinventing solutions to well-understood problems. Multi-agent systems are
no different. In Chapter 1, we defined agents as entities that can reason, act,
communicate, and adapt to solve tasks, and explored the benefits of using
multiple agents for complex tasks with planning requirements, diverse
expertise needs, and adaptive solutions. This chapter explores the
orchestration patterns that have emerged for coordinating multiple agents
effectively.
The architecture of multi-agent orchestration profoundly impacts system
behavior. A poorly chosen pattern can lead to infinite loops, excessive costs,

@@PAGE 67@@
or brittle solutions that break under real-world conditions. Conversely, some
patterns result in inherently more reliable (but constrained) systems, while
others enable scalable systems that gracefully adapt to handle complex tasks.
Importantly, agents work on tasks, and selecting the right task management
pattern—i.e., when to step, delegate to a human, or retry—is crucial for
preventing runaway execution and ensuring that agents remain productive.
This chapter presents a taxonomy of multi-agent design patterns organized
along a spectrum from explicit control to emergent behavior. Figure  2.1
provides a visual overview of this spectrum.

@@PAGE 68@@

@@PAGE 69@@
Figure 2.1: Autonomy spectrum for multi-agent orchestration patterns, showing the progression from explicit workflow control to emergent autonomous coordination.
2.1 
A 
Taxonomy 
of 
Multi-Agent
Orchestration Patterns
If you read multiple articles on how agents should be orchestrated, you’ll
encounter various terms like “sequential patterns,” “supervisor patterns,”
“hierarchical patterns,” and “swarm patterns.” While these descriptions vary,
the underlying patterns can be categorized along a fundamental spectrum:
the level of autonomy granted to agents in determining their orchestration.
At one end of this spectrum are workflow patterns - where developers
explicitly define execution paths and control flow. At the other end are
autonomous patterns - where agents determine orchestration through
runtime reasoning and communication. Understanding this spectrum is
crucial because each approach offers distinct trade-offs between
predictability and flexibility.
Multi-agent coordination builds on decades of distributed systems research.
Traditional workflow engines like Apache Airflow, Temporal, and Prefect
remain excellent foundations for implementing workflow patterns through
DAG-based dependency management and robust state synchronization.
However, AI agents introduce fundamental differences: semantic reasoning
using natural language rather than rules/heuristics, dynamic planning that
adapts based on intermediate results, probabilistic outputs requiring new
error 
detection 
approaches, 
and 
token-based 
economics 
where
communication costs scale with conversation length. These differences
become most pronounced in autonomous patterns, where AI-driven
coordination enables capabilities beyond traditional workflow systems.
2.1.1 Implementation Roadmap
Before diving into each pattern, here’s how this chapter’s concepts map to
concrete implementations in subsequent chapters (see Table  2.1). This
roadmap helps you connect theoretical patterns to working code as you
progress through the book.

@@PAGE 70@@
Table 2.1: Pattern-to-implementation mapping showing how theoretical concepts in this chapter connect to concrete code in subsequent chapters.
Pattern
Category
Specific
Pattern
Implementation
Chapter
Key Classes/Concepts
Workflow
Sequential
Chapter 6
Workflow, 
FunctionStep,
.chain()
Workflow
Conditional
Chapter 6
Edge 
with 
conditions,
branching logic
Workflow
Parallel
Chapter 6
DAG 
execution, 
fan-
out/fan-in
Autonomous
Round-
Robin
Chapter 7
RoundRobinOrchestrator
Autonomous
AI-Driven
Chapter 7
AIOrchestrator with LLM
selector
Autonomous
Plan-Based
Chapter 7
PlanBasedOrchestrator with
explicit plans
Autonomous
Handoff
Chapter 7
Peer-to-peer 
delegation
patterns
Navigating This Chapter:
 
Theory-first readers: Read all pattern sections sequentially to build a
complete mental model, then proceed to implementation chapters with
full context.
Learn-by-building readers: Read each pattern section, then
immediately explore the corresponding implementation chapter to see
the concept in action.
Reference readers: Use Table 2.1 to jump between theoretical patterns
and their code implementations as needed.
The remainder of this chapter explores each pattern’s characteristics, trade-
offs, and use cases. As you read, remember that workflow patterns become
the picoagents.workflow module (explicit control via computational graphs),
while autonomous patterns become the picoagents.orchestration module
(emergent control via agent reasoning).

@@PAGE 71@@
2.2 Workflow Patterns (Explicit Control)
Workflow patterns provide developer-defined execution paths with
predictable behavior. A common, emergent practice is to borrow concepts
from graph theory and model multi-agent orchestration as computational
graphs where nodes represent computational units (a single function, agent,
or even an agent team) and edges define control flow between nodes.
The key concepts in this approach include:
 
Node: A computational unit within the graph (e.g., an agent or
function). Nodes typically have defined inputs which they can process
and generate an output data structure. In addition, nodes may maintain
their own internal state, read and modify some shared state. They
interact with the rest of the system through their output and shared
state.
Edge: A connection between nodes that defines control flow or
transitions between two nodes. For an edge E that defines a transition
from node A to node B, the implied behavior is that the output of A
becomes the input of B. Edges may be conditional—e.g., the transition
from node A to node B only occurs if a certain condition is met. The
condition may be based on the output of the previous node, some
shared state, some external signal, arbitrary logic, human input, or a
combination of these.
In turn, a graph approach enables several key benefits: validation of
execution paths before runtime, visualization of agent interactions (ease of
reasoning about system behavior), and deterministic execution behavior.
2.2.1 Sequential Workflows
Sequential workflows are orchestration patterns that implement linear
execution where each node’s output feeds into the next node (A -> B -> C),
ensuring ordered processing with predictable execution timing. For example,
a news summarization pipeline shown in Figure 2.2:

@@PAGE 72@@
Figure 2.2: Sequential Workflow Pattern showing linear execution flow from user request through topic selection, research, analysis, to report generation.
Each step must complete before the next begins, ensuring ordered processing
of information. Sequential workflows are ideal for tasks with natural
sequential dependencies where the output of one stage becomes the essential
input for the next. They provide predictable execution timing and clear error
isolation - if one stage fails, you know exactly where the breakdown
occurred. 
In 
Chapter 
6, 
you’ll 
implement 
this 
pattern 
using
workflow.chain(step_a, step_b, step_c) to connect steps sequentially.
2.2.2 Conditional Workflows
Conditional workflows are orchestration patterns that use logic-based edges
to determine the next node based on conditions, enabling branching
execution paths and dynamic routing. A classic example is code
development shown in Figure 2.3:

@@PAGE 73@@
Figure 2.3: Conditional Workflow Pattern showing branching logic where code testing can either pass (leading to deployment) or fail (leading back to code writing).
This pattern extends naturally to supervisor-style workflows , a conditional
workflow variant where a central control node evaluates requests and routes
tasks to specialized agents based on task characteristics. Consider a customer
service system that routes inquiries to appropriate departments:

@@PAGE 74@@
Figure 2.4: Supervisor Workflow Pattern showing a control node routing tasks to specialized agents based on inquiry type.
The supervisor evaluates each incoming request and delegates to the
appropriate specialist agent, with results flowing back for final processing.
In Chapter 6, conditional routing uses Edge objects with conditions to enable
branching based on validation results:
workflow.add_edge(
    "validate", 
    "process", 
    condition={
        "type": "output_based", 
        "field": "is_valid", 

@@PAGE 75@@
        "value": True
    }
)
When each node itself contains a workflow, we get hierarchical patterns that
enable complex systems like multi-tier support desks. The main supervisor
delegates to department supervisors, who in turn manage their specialized
teams—creating multiple layers of orchestration for handling complex
organizational workflows.
2.2.3 Parallel Workflows
Parallel workflows are orchestration patterns that enable concurrent
execution of independent tasks using Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) ,
with fan-out phases that split work and fan-in phases that combine results.
The pattern has a fan-out phase (splitting work) and fan-in phase (combining
results):

@@PAGE 76@@
Figure 2.5: Parallel Workflow Pattern showing concurrent execution of independent tasks with fan-out and fan-in phases.
Parallel execution is ideal for tasks where work can be parallelized without
side effects, like processing multiple data sources or running independent
analyses. This pattern provides significant performance benefits when
individual tasks are time-consuming and can run simultaneously. However, it
requires careful orchestration at the fan-in stage to ensure all parallel
branches complete before proceeding. The implementation in Chapter 6 uses
DAG execution with automatic fan-in detection—when multiple edges point
to the same step with “always” conditions, the runner waits for all
dependencies to complete.

@@PAGE 77@@
The primary advantage of workflow patterns is reliability - you know
exactly what will happen and when. However, this predictability comes at
the cost of flexibility. Workflow patterns struggle with tasks that require
dynamic adaptation or where the optimal sequence of actions cannot be
predetermined.
From an implementation perspective, there is the concept of a build phase
where the graph is constructed, and a run phase where the graph is executed.
The experienced reader will likely observe that these workflow patterns are
fundamentally similar to well-known pipeline patterns used extensively in
data processing and software development. Beyond incorporating intelligent
computations (e.g., LLMs in nodes or nested workflows), the core concepts
remain largely unchanged. This similarity is actually advantageous—it
allows us to leverage existing ideas from software engineering, scaling, and
testing to build reliable multi-agent systems.
However, this approach relies on several assumptions: that the solution to
the problem is known, meaning the correct task decomposition is identified;
that the necessary resources, such as time and developer expertise, are
available to create the appropriate sequence of actions; and that the task is
static and predictable, without the need for real-time adjustments or changes.
These assumptions often do not hold in many dynamic, real-world situations
where task parameters can change and solutions require flexibility and
adaptability that a fixed, predefined pipeline cannot provide. In addition,
many teams may lack the resources needed to craft specific solutions for a
wide array of tasks.
When these assumptions don’t hold—when tasks are dynamic, solutions are
unknown, or resources are limited—autonomous patterns offer an alternative
approach that shifts control from developers to the agents themselves.
2.3 
Autonomous 
Patterns 
(Emergent
Control)
Autonomous patterns enable runtime-determined execution based on task
state and agent reasoning. A critical idea here is that the flow of control is

@@PAGE 78@@
driven by an AI model and hence dynamically determined at runtime.
Rather than following prescribed paths, agents orchestrate through
communication and shared understanding of the current task context. These
patterns exist on a spectrum of control, from structured orchestration to fully
emergent behavior.
Agents All the Way Down
An important design principle applies to both workflow and autonomous patterns: any “agent”
may itself be a multi-agent system internally. These composite agents present as a single entity
to the broader system while their internal conversations and orchestration remain private.
For example, what appears as a single “Coder agent” in a plan-based orchestration might
internally use a sequential workflow (Research→Code→Test steps). Similarly, a “Research
Team” agent in a handoff pattern might internally coordinate specialists through AI-driven
conversation. A workflow node labeled “Legal Review” could internally be a parallel workflow
distributing documents across multiple reviewers simultaneously.
This hierarchical approach provides clear boundaries and reduces communication noise in the
overall system. It also allows you to use different orchestration patterns at different abstraction
layers—choosing the right pattern for each level’s specific coordination needs rather than
forcing a single pattern everywhere.
2.3.1 Plan-Based Orchestration Pattern
The plan-based orchestration pattern is an autonomous pattern that employs
a single orchestrator agent to manage entire task execution through explicit
plan creation, dynamic task assignment, and centralized progress
monitoring. This agent acts as a “project manager”, creating plans, assigning
work, reviewing progress, and orchestrating between specialized agents.
Control flow characteristics:
 
Plan Management: Orchestrator maintains explicit task plans with
assignments and dependencies
Visibility: Orchestrator sees all context; other agents receive only
relevant information

@@PAGE 79@@
Task Assignment: Explicit work distribution by the orchestrator based
on the current plan
State Management: Centralized in the orchestrator (plan, progress
monitoring, result evaluation).
Figure 2.6: Plan-Based Orchestration Pattern showing a single orchestrator managing task execution across multiple agents.
Consider a software development task: the orchestrator creates a
development plan, assigns research to Agent A, monitors the output, then
assigns coding to Agent B with only the relevant context from Agent A’s
research. This selective information sharing can help prevent context
overload and maintains focus.
Orchestration patterns excel at complex task decomposition and resource
management. They can efficiently orchestrate diverse specialists while
maintaining oversight. However, they create a single point of failure and
may bottleneck on the orchestrator’s reasoning capabilities.

@@PAGE 80@@
In Chapter  7, the PlanBasedOrchestrator implements this pattern with LLM-
generated plans and automatic step evaluation:
from picoagents.orchestration import PlanBasedOrchestrator
orchestrator = PlanBasedOrchestrator(
    agents=[researcher, coder, reviewer],
    termination=MaxMessageTermination(20),
    model_client=model,
    max_step_retries=2
)
result = await orchestrator.run_stream(
    "Build a data analysis tool"
)
The orchestrator autonomously creates an execution plan (Step 1: research,
Step 2: code, Step 3: review), evaluates each step’s success before
proceeding, and retries failed steps with enhanced instructions based on the
failure analysis. This automated planning and recovery makes the pattern
resilient to transient failures while maintaining oversight.
Addressing Complex Tasks with Plan-Based Orchestration
In November 2023, a group of researchers from HuggingFace and Meta wrote a paper
introducing the GAIA benchmark (Mialon et al. 2023). The core purpose was to introduce tasks
that require capabilities such as reasoning, multi-modality handling, web browsing, and
generally tool-use proficiency - tasks that are conceptually simple for humans yet challenging
for most advanced AIs. At the time, I got to collaborate with my colleague Adam Fourney who
led a project where our goal was to use AutoGen to design a multi-agent system that did well on
GAIA. Over many iterations and after winning the #1 spot on the leaderboard, we arrived at a
design that was published in a paper titled “Magentic-One: Building a Multi-Agent System with
LLMs for Complex Task Completion” (Fourney et al. 2024). Magentic-One uses a multi-agent
architecture where a lead agent, the Orchestrator, directs four other agents to solve tasks
through explicit Task and Progress Ledgers, achieving statistically competitive performance to
the state-of-the-art on multiple challenging agentic benchmarks. Similarly, Anthropic’s
Research system (Hadfield et al. 2025) employs an orchestrator-worker pattern, where a lead
agent coordinates the process while delegating to specialized subagents that operate in parallel,

@@PAGE 81@@
with the lead agent dynamically spawning 1-10+ subagents based on query complexity,
resulting in a 90.2% performance improvement over single-agent approaches.
While orchestration patterns maintain centralized control, handoff patterns
distribute decision-making across agents while preserving structured
orchestration.
2.3.2 Handoff Pattern
Handoff patterns are autonomous patterns that enable agents to operate with
limited, local knowledge while still achieving coordinated behavior through
peer-to-peer delegation. Agents make local decisions about when and to
whom they should transfer control based on their understanding of the task
and knowledge of other available agents.
Control flow characteristics:
 
Visibility: Each agent knows only a subset of other agents and their
capabilities
Turn-taking: Direct handoff via explicit transfer mechanisms
Decision making: Local decisions based on task needs and known
agents
State management: Explicitly passed between agents during handoff

@@PAGE 82@@
Figure 2.7: Handoff Pattern showing agents transferring control and context based on task needs.
A customer service scenario illustrates this pattern: a Customer Service agent
can handoff to either a Technical Specialist or Billing agent based on the
issue type. The Technical Specialist, in turn, can handoff to a Senior
Engineer or return control to Customer Service. Each agent makes handoff
decisions based on their local assessment of the situation and passes relevant
context along.
Handoff patterns provide scalability and specialization while avoiding
central bottlenecks. They’re particularly effective for well-defined domains
where handoff criteria can be clearly established. From an implementation
perspective, this pattern is relatively simple - agents can be represented as
tools; for example, Agent A sees Agents B and D as available tools, and

@@PAGE 83@@
handoffs become tool calls. However, they require careful design to prevent
agents from getting stuck or cycling ineffectively.
Moving further along the autonomy spectrum, conversation-driven patterns
remove even the structured handoff constraints, allowing orchestration to
emerge naturally through shared dialogue.
2.3.3 Conversation-Driven Pattern (Group Chat)
In conversation-driven patterns (also known as group chat patterns ), all
agents participate in a shared conversation where orchestration emerges
through turn taking as part of a dialogue rather than explicit plans or
structured handoffs. Turn taking is the mechanism by which agents take
sequential turns contributing to the shared conversation. This approach
mirrors human team collaboration where everyone can see the discussion
and contribute when appropriate.
Why Conversation-Driven Patterns Work Naturally
Most modern AI models are trained for “chat completions” - taking turns within conversations
by reading message history and generating appropriate responses. This makes LLMs inherently
well-suited for conversation-driven coordination, as they can naturally participate in multi-turn
dialogues and determine appropriate contributions based on conversational context.
Implementation simplicity: The orchestration mechanism is essentially “all agents append to
the same shared conversation list” - requiring minimal orchestration logic compared to complex
workflow graphs.
Automated improvements: System performance improves automatically as upstream AI
models become more capable, providing a “free upgrade” path without code changes.

@@PAGE 84@@
Figure 2.8: In conversation-Driven patterns, agents primarily collaborate by appending to a shared conversation.
Control flow characteristics:
 
Visibility: Broadcast - all agents observe all messages in the shared
conversation
Turn-taking: Determined by selection mechanisms (round-robin,
random, or AI-driven)
Decision making: Next speaker selected based on conversation
context, not predetermined plans
State management: Implicit in the conversation history
2.3.3.1 Round-Robin Conversation Pattern

@@PAGE 85@@
In the round-robin conversation pattern, agents take turns in a fixed,
repeating order, until some termination condition is met. The conversation
flows in a circular manner, with each agent contributing their input before
passing the turn to the next agent.
Figure 2.9: In the round-robin conversation pattern, agents take turns in a fixed order.
In Chapter  7, the RoundRobinOrchestrator implements this pattern by cycling
through agents in order:
from picoagents.orchestration import RoundRobinOrchestrator
from picoagents.termination import MaxMessageTermination
orchestrator = RoundRobinOrchestrator(

@@PAGE 86@@
    agents=[researcher, writer, critic],
    termination=MaxMessageTermination(12)  # Stop after 12 messages
)
async for message in orchestrator.run_stream("Research solar energy trends"):
    print(message)  # researcher -> writer -> critic -> researcher -> ...
2.3.3.2 AI-Driven Conversation Pattern
In an AI-driven conversation pattern, an LLM or other AI model selects the
agent to take the next turn based on the current conversation context. This
selection can be based on the task state, agent expertise, or other dynamic
factors. The turn selection mechanism itself can be another LLM prompt that
evaluates the conversation history and decides which agent should speak
next.

@@PAGE 87@@
Figure 2.10: In the AI-driven conversation pattern, an LLM dynamically selects the next agent based on context.
For example, consider a research task where a Research agent gathers
information, a Writer crafts content, and a Critic provides feedback. In
round-robin selection, each agent takes turns in a predetermined order. In AI-
driven selection, an LLM selector determines who should take the next turn
based on the current conversation state: “The research is complete, so the
Writer should draft content” or “The draft needs improvement, so the Critic
should provide feedback.”
In Chapter 7, the AIOrchestrator uses an LLM to intelligently select the next
speaker:

@@PAGE 88@@
from picoagents.orchestration import AIOrchestrator
orchestrator = AIOrchestrator(
    agents=[researcher, writer, critic],
    model_client=model,  # Used for agent selection
    termination=MaxMessageTermination(12)
)
async for message in orchestrator.run_stream("Write article on AI trends"):
    print(message)
The LLM analyzes the conversation context and agent capabilities to select
the next speaker dynamically. For example, after research completes, the
LLM selects the writer to draft content; after the draft, it selects the critic to
provide feedback. This adaptive selection enables more natural collaboration
compared to fixed turn-taking.
The strength of conversation-driven patterns lies in their transparency and
emergent collaboration. All agents maintain shared context and can build
naturally on each other’s contributions. With AI-driven selection,
sophisticated behaviors emerge organically - for example, a Coder agent
might be selected again after code execution results appear in the
conversation history, enabling natural retry loops, branching logic, and in-
situ exploration without explicit programming.
Connection to Single-Agent Patterns
Conversation-driven patterns naturally enable well-known single-agent research patterns like
ReAct (Yao et al. 2022) and Reflexion (Shinn et al. 2023) through turn-taking and shared
conversation history.
ReAct creates a Thought-Action-Observation loop where reasoning traces guide action plans.
When answering complex questions, the agent alternates between thinking (“I need to search
for X”), acting (searching Wikipedia), and observing results to plan next steps.
Reflexion converts failures into verbal feedback stored as episodic memory. When tasks fail,
agents generate reflections explaining mistakes and corrections—like “I incorrectly assumed
the pan was in the stove burner. Next time I should verify its location first”—then apply these
lessons in subsequent attempts.

@@PAGE 89@@
In conversation-driven patterns, these behaviors emerge naturally: specialized agents (Thinker,
Actor, Observer) implement the Think-Act-Observe cycle through turn-taking, while past
mistakes in conversation history enable Reflexion-like learning. The conversation itself
becomes the episodic memory, enabling both reasoning loops and learning from failure.
However, conversation-driven patterns face significant limitations. Token
usage grows linearly with conversation length, making them expensive for
extended tasks. Context windows can overflow, causing agents to lose
important early context. As highlighted by research from Cognition (Yan
2025), agents working from the same conversation may still make
“conflicting decisions” due to incomplete understanding of each other’s
reasoning, potentially leading to fragmented outcomes despite shared
visibility.
Working Code: Orchestration Patterns
Explore complete implementations of the patterns discussed:
 
Round-Robin & AI-Driven: orchestration/ - Round-robin turns and intelligent agent selection
Plan-Based: orchestration/plan-based.py - Centralized orchestrator with dynamic planning
Workflow Patterns: workflows/ - Sequential, conditional, and parallel execution
Having explored the full spectrum of coordination patterns—from explicit
workflow control to emergent autonomous behavior—we can now compare
their characteristics and understand how to choose the right approach for
specific use cases.
2.4 Pattern Selection and Comparison
Having explored the full spectrum of multi-agent orchestration patterns, we
can now compare each approach across four key dimensions: Control Flow
(how execution moves between agents), Autonomy (how flexibly the
system can explore solution paths not explicitly programmed by developers),
Control (how much predictable control developers have over system

@@PAGE 90@@
behavior), and Complexity (the implementation and operational complexity
required).
2.4.1 Comparative Analysis
Table 2.2 summarizes the trade-offs between patterns. Notice how control
and autonomy move inversely: workflows give you predictability at the cost
of flexibility, while conversation-driven patterns enable exploration but with
less deterministic behavior.
Table 2.2: Comparative analysis of multi-agent orchestration patterns showing trade-offs between control flow mechanisms, agent autonomy, developer control, and implementation
complexity.
Pattern
Control Flow
Autonomy Control Complexity
Sequential
Workflow
Linear 
sequence
(A->B->C)
Low
High
Low
Conditional
Workflow
Conditional routing Low
High
Low-
Medium
Parallel Workflow
Concurrent
execution
Low
High
Medium
Plan-Based
Orchestration
Dynamic
orchestration
Medium
High
Medium
Handoff
Peer-to-peer
delegation
Medium
Medium Low
Round-Robin
Conversation
Fixed rotation
Low
High
Low
AI-Driven
Conversation
Context-driven
selection
High
Low
Medium
2.4.2 Selection Criteria
Rather than asking “which pattern is best?”, ask “what does my task need?”
Different tasks have fundamentally different requirements. A data pipeline
with known steps needs predictability; an open-ended research task needs
exploration. Match the pattern to the task’s inherent characteristics.
Task Characteristics:
 

@@PAGE 91@@
Well-defined, repeatable processes -> Workflow patterns (Sequential,
Conditional, Parallel)
Dynamic, exploratory tasks -> Autonomous patterns (Conversation-
driven)
Complex planning required -> Plan-Based Orchestration
Domain expertise needed -> Handoff patterns
System Requirements:
 
High predictability needed -> Workflow patterns
Maximum autonomy required -> AI-Driven Conversation
Resource constraints -> Handoff patterns (minimal coordination
overhead)
Scalability concerns -> Parallel Workflows or Handoff patterns
Implementation Considerations:
 
Developer resources available -> Workflow patterns
Rapid prototyping needed -> Conversation-driven patterns
Production reliability critical -> Workflow patterns with explicit task
management
Human oversight required -> Any pattern + Human Delegation
2.4.3 Hybrid Approaches
Most production systems benefit from hybrid approaches that combine
multiple patterns based on task decomposition:
 
Use workflow patterns for predictable, well-understood components
Apply autonomous patterns where flexibility and adaptation are
essential
Implement task management patterns consistently across all
orchestration types
Design hierarchical compositions where complex agents internally
use different patterns

@@PAGE 92@@
The key principle is pattern-to-task alignment: match the orchestration
pattern to each task’s inherent characteristics and your system’s reliability
requirements, rather than forcing all orchestration through a single pattern
type.
2.5 Task Management Patterns
Beyond orchestration patterns, successful multi-agent systems require
explicit task management strategies to ensure productive outcomes and
prevent runaway execution. These cross-cutting concerns apply to both
workflow and autonomous patterns.
Task management patterns address critical operational concerns that
transcend the orchestration taxonomy. While workflow patterns often embed
some task management logic within their graph structure, autonomous
patterns particularly benefit from explicit task management strategies.
2.5.1 Termination Patterns
Effective termination strategies prevent infinite loops and excessive resource
consumption:
 
Budget-based termination : Set limits on time, cost, or iteration count
Semantic termination : Use LLM reasoning to detect task completion
External signals: Enable human intervention or API-triggered stops
For instance, a research task might terminate after 10 iterations OR when an
LLM determines the quality threshold has been met, whichever comes first.
2.5.2 Human Delegation Patterns
Complex or sensitive tasks often require human oversight . Two primary
approaches enable effective human delegation:
LLM-Based Delegation relies on agent reasoning to determine escalation
needs. Agents assess factors like risk, complexity, and confidence levels to
decide when human input is required. For example: “This customer

@@PAGE 93@@
complaint mentions potential legal action and could impact our reputation -
escalating to human review.”
Rule-Based Delegation uses explicit triggers defined in code. These provide
deterministic, auditable escalation based on hard thresholds: financial
transactions exceeding $10,000, requests involving medical or legal
domains, or three consecutive failed attempts at task completion.
2.6 Summary
 
Orchestration Spectrum: Multi-agent patterns exist on a spectrum
from explicit control (workflow patterns) to emergent behavior
(autonomous patterns). The level of autonomy granted to agents
fundamentally determines system predictability versus flexibility trade-
offs.
Workflow Patterns (Explicit Control): Sequential workflows provide
linear execution (A->B->C), conditional workflows enable branching
logic and supervisor delegation, and parallel workflows support
concurrent execution via DAGs. These patterns offer high reliability
and predictability but limited adaptability to dynamic situations.
Autonomous Patterns (Emergent Control): Plan-based orchestration
uses a central orchestrator for dynamic planning, handoff patterns
enable peer-to-peer delegation with local decision-making, and
conversation-driven patterns allow orchestration through shared
dialogue. These patterns provide greater flexibility but require more
sophisticated orchestration mechanisms.
Pattern Selection Criteria: Choose workflow patterns for well-
defined, repeatable processes requiring high predictability. Select
autonomous patterns for dynamic, exploratory tasks needing flexibility.
Consider hybrid approaches that combine multiple patterns based on
task decomposition and system requirements.
Task Management Essentials: Successful multi-agent systems require
explicit task management strategies including termination patterns

@@PAGE 94@@
(budget-based, semantic, or external signals), human delegation
patterns (LLM-based or rule-based), and error handling mechanisms
that transcend specific orchestration approaches.
Implementation Guidance: Match orchestration patterns to task
characteristics rather than forcing all orchestration through a single
pattern type. Use hierarchical composition where complex agents
internally implement different patterns while presenting unified
interfaces to the broader system.
OceanofPDF.com
