
@@PAGE 198@@
5 Building Computer Use Agents
This chapter covers:
 
Understanding when interface automation becomes necessary beyond
code execution and APIs
The anatomy of computer use agents: action generation, interface
representation, execution
Strategies for representing interfaces through text, images, and hybrid
approaches
Action sequence generation and translating tasks into interface actions
Building agents that observe, reason, and act on web and desktop
interfaces
Challenges: reliability, latency, security, and action disambiguation
In Chapter 4, we built agents that can reason using LLMs, act through tools,
and maintain memory. We explored how function tools allow agents to
execute code, call APIs, and perform structured tasks. However, many real-
world scenarios require a different approach - agents that can understand and
interact with user interfaces similar to how humans might interact with
applications to accomplish tasks. These types of agents are known as
computer use agents .
In this chapter, we will start by motivating the need for computer use agents,
the core ideas that underpin them and walk through an extension of our Agent
class from Chapter  4 to build a ComputerUseAgent class that can drive a web
browser to accomplish tasks. We will explore components such as interface
representation, action sequence generation, and action execution. Finally, we
will discuss challenges and opportunities in the field of computer use agents.
5.1 When Code and APIs Aren’t Enough:
The Role of Computer Use Agents

@@PAGE 199@@

@@PAGE 200@@
Figure 5.1: Agents can act via tools by either executing code (or calling apis) or by directly interacting with applications. For tasks that involve complex dynamic behaviors including
manipulating interfaces, or tasks (for example, proprietary software) that have no APIs, computer use agents can be valuable. Importantly, many use cases may benefit from a
combination of both approaches.
In Chapter 4, we explored how to build agents with access to generative AI
models and tools (code interpreter, functions) that interact to solve tasks. We
outlined how the quality of tools that agents have access to can significantly
impact the tasks they can solve, and outlined how general purpose tools such
as code interpreters or the ability to directly control applications can be used
to solve a wide range of tasks.
Importantly, though many tasks can be accomplished through code execution
(for example, the LLM generates code to solve the task, or can correctly
select an existing function to solve the task), there are task scenarios where a
code execution approach falls short (as illustrated in Figure 5.1).
For example, some tasks have complex, dynamic behaviors that are
relatively easy for humans to accomplish by manipulating interfaces but
challenging to specify programmatically. Examples include opening an
image of a map of Northern California in Photoshop and drawing polygon
sections only on areas with bodies of water, or manipulating data in
spreadsheet applications with complex formatting. Beyond individual tasks,
computer use agents enable broader automation patterns: research agents
that navigate multiple websites to gather and compare information
(aggregating pricing data, monitoring competitors, synthesizing news); back-
office agents that triage emails and create corresponding GitHub issues,
update CRM records, or reconcile data across disconnected enterprise
systems; and software testing agents that execute end-to-end test scenarios,
perform visual regression testing, or explore UI paths looking for errors. In
other cases, applications may have functionality explicitly designed for
human interaction, with no corresponding API available.
These tasks often require a deep understanding of the interface layout, visual
cues, and context that may not be easily accessible through traditional
programming methods.
Tip

@@PAGE 201@@
While basic web scraping can fetch HTML content for static content, modern web applications
often use dynamic JavaScript, AJAX requests, and anti-bot measures (CAPTCHAs, header
checks). Computer use agents that simulate human interactions—clicking buttons, filling forms,
handling dynamic content—can automate tasks impossible through code alone. This should
always comply with website terms of service.
In these scenarios, agents that can take a task description and interact
directly with the application’s user interface to solve the task can be
valuable. Computer use agents automate tasks by interacting directly with
user interfaces, handling scenarios that are difficult to accomplish through
code execution alone. In fact, if you have used emerging tools like Operator
from OpenAI (OpenAI 2025), Computer Use from Anthropic (Anthropic
2024a), TryCUA (TryCUA 2024), or Manus (Manus AI 2025), these follow
the general principles of computer use agents.
We will first discuss core concepts of computer use agents, including the
anatomy of a computer use agent, the role of LLMs in generating action
sequences, and the challenges faced by computer use agents. We will then
walk through the implementation of a computer use agent from scratch,
focusing on interface representation, action sequence planning, and action
execution. Finally, we will explore the challenges and opportunities in the
field of computer use agents.
pip install picoagents[computer-use]
playwright install
Listing 5.1: Complete ComputerUseAgent in action
...
from picoagents.agents import PlaywrightWebClient
async def main():
    web_client = PlaywrightWebClient(headless=False)
    computer_agent = ComputerUseAgent(
        interface_client=web_client,
        model_client=OpenAIChatCompletionClient(
            model="gpt-4.1-mini"),

@@PAGE 202@@
        use_screenshots=True, 
    )
    task = "Find the latest AI news on techcrunch.com?"
    try:
        result = await computer_agent.run(task)
        print(result.content)
    finally:
        await web_client.close()
if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
At the end of this chapter, we will have built an agent class that can drive a
web browser in addressing questions (see Listing 5.1). But before you run
this code, you will need to ensure that you have playwright installed and
have run an initial command to setup playwright on your machine.
Playwright is a library for driving web browsers (we will cover it in detail
later in this chapter).
Running this code will open a web browser where you can see the agent
navigate to www.techcrunch.com, perform several actions, and return an answer.
Working Code: Computer Use Agents
Explore the complete implementation in the examples directory - look for computer_use.py for
working examples of agent composition, orchestration, and production patterns.
5.2 The Anatomy of a Computer Use Agent
Computer use agents, much like humans, must execute a set of steps to
accomplish a task. Let us begin by considering the following task: “Find and
print flights from Seattle to San Jose that depart after 5 pm and return before
9 am, departing this Wednesday and returning on Friday morning.” An agent
addressing this task may take the following steps, where each step can be
implemented as an action or sequence of actions on the interface:
 

@@PAGE 203@@
1. Navigate to a flight booking website, such as 
flights.google.com.
[navigate, browser]
2. Input Seattle in the departure field. [type, input]
3. Input San Jose in the arrival field. [type, input]
4. Select the desired dates of travel. [click, dropdown]
5. Set the departure flight filter for departures after 5 pm. [click,
dropdown]
6. Set the return flight filter for arrivals before 9 am. [click, dropdown]
7. Click the search button to find the flights that meet the criteria. [click,
button]
8. Print results [click, print hotkey - Ctrl+P]
If we reflect on how this might be implemented, we can see that the agent
must:
 
1. First understand the interface state (e.g., Is this a web page? What is the
current page? What fields are available for input? What buttons can be
clicked?).
2. Plan a sequence of actions to achieve the desired outcome or the next
desired outcome (e.g., enter a URL into the address bar and hit Enter).
3. Execute these actions on the interface (actual text entry and simulation
of the Enter button) to complete the task.
4. Repeat this process as needed to achieve the final goal.
Computer use agents follow an OBSERVE-THINK-ACT execution
pattern.
Concretely, we need mechanisms to represent the interface state, generate
action sequences, and execute these actions on the interface. As illustrated in
Figure 5.2, these mechanisms make up the core components of a computer
use agent.

@@PAGE 204@@
Figure 5.2: Computer Use Agents are composed of 3 components - an action sequence planner, an action executor, and an interface representation component. These components work
together to interpret, plan, and execute actions on user interfaces to accomplish tasks.
5.2.1 Action Sequence Generation
Action sequence generation is the process by which generative AI models
translate high-level tasks into specific interface actions. Computer use agents
rely on this capability to convert natural language instructions into
executable operations on user interfaces. In practice, off-the-shelf models
like GPT-4+ and its multimodal variants provide this capability. For
example, given the task “What is the botanical name of an invasive snail

@@PAGE 205@@
species in Florida?”, a language model might produce an action/target pair
like: “Action: search for ‘botanical name of invasive snail species in
Florida’, Target: search button on google.com”.
However, general-purpose models face two main challenges:
 
Interface Representation Format: The model’s applicability depends
on how the interface is represented. Text-based representations (e.g.,
HTML of a webpage) can use language models, while image-based
representations (e.g., screenshots) require multimodal models capable
of processing both text and images.
Contextual Understanding: Predicting the next action requires a deep
understanding of the current interface state. This includes handling
unexpected elements (e.g., pop-ups) and accurately locating UI targets
based on instructions.
To address these challenges, recent research in academia and industry has
explored fine-tuning base models specifically for GUI interaction tasks.
Rather than relying solely on prompted general-purpose models, these
specialized models are trained on large-scale datasets that pair interface
states with corresponding action sequences. For example, UI-TARS (Yujia
Lu et al. 2025) represents a new generation of purpose-built GUI agents that
achieve state-of-the-art performance through several key innovations: (1)
training on large-scale GUI screenshot datasets for enhanced perception, (2)
unified action modeling across platforms, (3) System-2 reasoning for
deliberate multi-step decision making, and (4) iterative training with
reflective online traces that enable the model to learn from its own
interaction history. This specialized approach has demonstrated significant
improvements over general-purpose models, achieving 24.6% success on
OSWorld (outperforming Claude Computer Use) and 46.6% on
AndroidWorld (surpassing GPT-4o’s 34.5%), suggesting that domain-
specific fine-tuning may represent an important direction for advancing
computer use agent capabilities.
Action sequence generation can be approached in two ways:
 

@@PAGE 206@@
Explicit Planning: The model generates a complete plan based on the
initial interface state, which is then executed. This method benefits
from structured reasoning but may struggle with dynamic interfaces
where early steps become obsolete. For example, when filling out a
contact form on a static website, the entire sequence could be planned
upfront.
Implicit Planning: The model generates the plan iteratively,
considering the current interface state at each step. This approach
adapts better to dynamic interfaces but may be less efficient and require
more trial and error.
The choice between explicit and implicit planning depends largely on the
nature of the interface and task requirements. Explicit planning works best
for static, predictable interfaces like login forms or contact forms where the
sequence of actions is well-defined and unlikely to change during execution.
These scenarios benefit from the efficiency of upfront planning and fewer
model calls. Implicit planning excels when working with dynamic interfaces
like flight booking systems, social media feeds, or search results pages
where the interface state changes unpredictably during task execution.
5.2.2 Agent Action Space
The action space of a computer use agent refers to the set of actions the
agent can take on the interface to accomplish a task. This space can be
defined by the types of interactions the agent can perform, such as clicking
buttons, typing text, selecting options from dropdowns, or submitting forms.
Importantly, it is crucial that this action space is defined and made available
to the generative model used to generate action sequences that address the
task.
5.3 Interface Representation
Interface representation is the method by which the current state of a user
interface is presented to AI models for understanding and action generation.
Computer use agents require this representation to perceive what elements
exist, where they are located, and what actions can be performed. The choice

@@PAGE 207@@
of representation format depends on the type of application being automated
(web, mobile, desktop) and the programmatic access available at runtime.
Three main approaches exist: text-based (DOM/HTML structure), image-
based (screenshots), and hybrid (combining both), each offering different
trade-offs between precision, computational cost, and visual understanding.
Web applications support multiple representation formats, as they can be
represented as text-based (html) or image-based (screenshots of the
interface) – both being accessible on the client side via a browser at runtime.
Mobile applications may have a text-based representation of the interface,
but it is often not accessible via a programmatic api at runtime. For example,
we may have access to the UI layout of an android application via the xml
layout file (or other UI component system) at train time, but not the actual
UI elements at runtime. Recent work like Ferret-UI (You et al. 2024) has
explored grounded mobile UI understanding with multimodal LLMs to
address these challenges. Similarly, desktop applications typically do not
have a text-based representation of the interface, and the only way to capture
the interface state is via screenshots or visual captures of the interface.
5.3.1 Text-Based Representation
This involves representing the interface as structured text data, such as
HTML, XML, JSON, or even raw text. This approach is efficient for
processing by language models, provides precise information about interface
elements, and works well with interfaces that have a clear text-based
structure. Common methods for text-based representation include parsing
the DOM of web pages, or leveraging accessibility APIs to access interface
elements via platform-specific APIs.
5.3.1.1 DOM Parsing
DOM parsing involves extracting structured data from web pages. The
HTML structure of a web page can be fetched either via a http request or
directly accessing the DOM of the page using a browser automation tool like
Playwright or Selenium. The generative model can then use this structured
data to generate the next action: the element to interact with (typically done
by generating a css selector that can be executed to locate the element) and
the action to perform on it.

@@PAGE 208@@
Tip
DOM Filtering
While the entire DOM can be used as an effective representation of the state of a web page, it
can be problematic to provide the entire DOM content to the model for several reasons. First,
the DOM can be quite large and contain irrelevant information (e.g., ads, hidden elements),
which can make it difficult for the model to focus on the relevant parts of the interface. Second,
many models have limited token capacity, so providing the entire DOM may exceed the
model’s input size limit. To address these issues, it’s often beneficial to filter the DOM to
include only the most relevant elements for the task at hand. This can involve selecting specific
elements based on their attributes, classes, or positions in the DOM, or using heuristics to
identify key elements that are likely to be relevant to the task.
Our ComputerUseAgent implementation automatically filters DOM content to
focus on interactive elements that agents can meaningfully interact with,
such as buttons, links, form inputs, and other clickable elements.
5.3.1.2 Accessibility APIs: Accessing interface elements via platform-
specific APIs
Accessibility APIs provide a way to programmatically access and interact
with user interface elements across different operating systems. These APIs
are designed to assist assistive technologies but can also be leveraged by
computer use agents to interact with applications.
 
For Windows: Microsoft UI Automation is an accessibility framework
that enables Windows applications to provide and consume
programmatic information about user interfaces (UIs). It provides
programmatic access to most UI elements on the desktop. Recent
research like UFO (Zhang et al. 2024) has demonstrated effective UI-
focused agents for Windows OS interaction using these APIs.
For macOS: The macOS Accessibility API provides similar
functionality for Apple systems. It allows applications to interact with
the user interface using AppleScript or Objective-C.

@@PAGE 209@@
These APIs can provide a text-based representation of the interface,
including element hierarchies, properties, and states. While this
representation can be easily fed into text-based models, it may struggle to
capture complex visual relationships or dynamic content. Additional
processing or complementary approaches (like computer vision) may be
needed to fully interpret visual cues and layout information.
5.3.2 Image-Based Representation
This entails using screenshots or visual captures to represent an interface to a
model. This method can capture visual information not present in text-based
structures, and works well with applications that lack accessible text-based
representations. However, processing images is computationally expensive
(more tokens compared to text), requires models with image processing
capabilities or some intermediate image processing step, often implies
increased latency, and may lose fine-grained textual information present in
the interface.
Often, due to the complexity of processing images (there is no notion of css
selectors that can be used to get references to specific elements in a
screenshot), image based representation may include a two-step process
where the image is first annotated with marks (e.g., bounding boxes around
elements with labels before being passed to the model for improved
performance) (Cheng et al. 2024). This can help the model focus on specific
elements of the interface and reduce the complexity of the image
representation. Projects like OmniParser (Yadong Lu et al. 2024) and Set-of-
mark prompting (Abuelsaad et al. 2024) are exploring this approach to
improve task performance.

@@PAGE 210@@
Figure 5.3: OMNIPARSER applies a detection model to parse interactable regions on the screen and a caption model to extract the functional semantics of the detected elements used to
annotate the image before being passed to a generative model for action generation.
5.3.3 Hybrid (Text and Image) Representation
Hybrid approaches that combine text and image representations are also
emerging, offering the benefits of both formats. For example, an
implementation may include logic to extract text-based information from the
DOM and overlay it on a screenshot to provide visual context, select
between text and image representations based on the task requirements, or
use a multimodal model that can process both text and images

@@PAGE 211@@
simultaneously. This approach can provide a more comprehensive
representation of the interface, capturing both the structural information and
visual context needed to generate accurate action sequences.
5.3.4 Comparing Interface Representation Strategies
The choice between text, image, and hybrid representations involves
fundamental trade-offs between precision, cost, and versatility. Text-based
representations provide efficient token usage and precise element targeting
through CSS selectors, but they miss visual context that humans rely on
when interacting with interfaces. Image-based representations capture
complete visual information and work with any interface type, but they
consume significantly more tokens and require multimodal models. Hybrid
approaches combine both formats—our ComputerUseAgent implementation
supports this through the format parameter in get_state(), which can return
text-only, visual-only, or hybrid representations depending on task
requirements.
Table  5.1 summarizes the key trade-offs between different interface
representation approaches for computer use agents.
Table 5.1: Comparison of interface representation strategies for computer use agents
Strategy
Key Advantages Key Limitations
Best Use Cases
Text-based
(DOM/HTML)
Efficient 
token
usage; 
Precise
element targeting
via 
CSS
selectors; 
Fast
processing
Misses 
visual
context; 
Limited
for apps without
text APIs
Web 
apps 
with
structured 
DOM;
Predictable
interfaces
Image-based
(Screenshots)
Captures 
visual
layout; 
Works
with 
any
interface 
type;
Handles dynamic
content
High token cost;
Requires
multimodal
models; No direct
element selectors
Desktop 
apps;
Visually 
complex
interfaces; 
Apps
without APIs
Hybrid (Text +
Image)
Combines
precision 
and
Higher
computational cost;
Production 
web
agents; 
Tasks

@@PAGE 212@@
context; Optimal
decision making;
Rich multimodal
input
Complex
implementation
requiring 
visual
understanding
(Recommended)
5.4 Action Executor (Interface Automation
Tools)
Once an action sequence has been planned, the computer use agent must
execute these actions on the target interface by an action executor. This
component is responsible for translating high-level actions into low-level
interface interactions, managing timing and synchronization, and handling
error cases and unexpected interface states. For example, in a web
application, the action executor may simulate mouse clicks, keyboard inputs,
or form submissions to interact with the interface. In a desktop application, it
may use OS-specific automation tools to control UI elements or simulate
user inputs. The action executor is typically an automation tool to the
interface representation component; that is, the same tooling used to derive
the interface state is used to execute actions on the interface.
Common tools for action execution include browser automation frameworks
like Playwright and platform automation libraries like PyAutoGUI that
provide support for simulating user interactions with desktop applications
across the Windows, macOS, and Linux platforms.
5.4.1 An Overview of Playwright
Playwright is an open-source automation library developed by Microsoft that
allows developers to control web browsers programmatically. It provides a
high-level API to interact with Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit browsers,
making it suitable for web scraping, automated testing, and building
computer use agents.
Playwright features include:
 

@@PAGE 213@@
1. Cross-browser 
support: 
Playwright 
can 
automate 
Chromium
(including Chrome and Edge), Firefox, and WebKit (Safari) with a
single API.
2. Comprehensive selectors and actions: It offers mechanisms to locate
and interact with elements on a web page, including CSS selectors,
XPath, and text content. It supports a wide range of actions like
clicking, typing, selecting options, capturing screenshots, and more.
3. Auto-wait functionality: Playwright automatically waits for elements
to be ready before performing actions, reducing the need for explicit
waits and making scripts more reliable.
4. Network interception: It allows monitoring and modifying network
requests and responses, useful for testing different scenarios or mocking
API responses.
5. Mobile emulation: Playwright can emulate mobile devices, enabling
testing of responsive designs and mobile-specific features.
5.5 Implementing a Computer Use Agent
Now that we understand the conceptual foundations, let’s build our
ComputerUseAgent step by step. Rather than creating an entirely new agent
architecture from scratch, we’ll make a key design decision that leverages
the robust foundation we built in Chapter 4.
Our implementation focuses on web browser automation using Playwright,
but the architectural patterns we develop apply equally to desktop
applications (using PyAutoGUI or platform-specific accessibility APIs) and
mobile interfaces (using Appium or similar frameworks). The key
abstraction is the interface client—swap the browser client for a desktop
automation client, and the same agent architecture handles different interface
types.
5.5.1 An “Agent + Tools” Architecture
Rather than building a custom solution from scratch, we’ll extend our base
Agent class to interact with interfaces. The key insight is treating interface
actions—clicking, typing, navigating—as tools the agent can use. Our base

@@PAGE 214@@
agent already provides an execution loop, tool calling mechanism, and
context management for interface automation.
Our ComputerUseAgent inherits from the base Agent class and adds three
components: an interface client for browser automation, specialized tools
that represent interface actions, and enhanced observation capabilities that
capture the results of actions. When a task comes in, the agent uses the
model to select and execute tools, just as our base agent did with functions in
Chapter 4.
Listing 5.2: ComputerUseAgent class architecture
class ComputerUseAgent(Agent):
    def __init__(
        self,
        interface_client,
        model_client,
        use_screenshots=True,
        max_actions=10,
        **kwargs
    ):
        # Create specialized web automation tools
        playwright_tools = create_playwright_tools(
            interface_client
        )
        # Inherit proven agent patterns
        # - tool calling, context management, streaming
        super().__init__(
            model_client=model_client,
            tools=playwright_tools,  # Our action space
            max_iterations=max_actions,
            **kwargs
        )
        # Manage browser interface internally
        self.interface_client = interface_client
        self.use_screenshots = use_screenshots

@@PAGE 215@@
This approach gives us key benefits: the base agent’s streaming capabilities
work with our new tools, error handling and cancellation mechanisms extend
to browser automation, and context management maintains conversation
history with tool results.
5.5.2 Defining the Action Space Through Tools
Our computer use agent’s functionality centers on its tools. Each tool
represents a specific action the agent can take on a web interface, from
navigating to URLs to clicking buttons and typing text. These tools define
our agent’s action space for web interaction.
Listing 5.3: Creating the Playwright tool suite
def create_playwright_tools(interface_client):
    """Create specialized tools for web interface interaction."""
    return [
        NavigateTool(interface_client),
        ClickTool(interface_client),
        TypeTool(interface_client),
        SelectTool(interface_client),
        PressTool(interface_client),
        HoverTool(interface_client),
        ScrollTool(interface_client),
        ObservePageTool(interface_client),
    ]
Each tool wraps a specific Playwright operation. The implementation defines
each as a BaseTool subclass with proper parameter schemas. For example, the
NavigateTool requires a URL parameter, ClickTool requires a CSS selector, and
TypeTool requires both a selector and text to type. These tools define our
agent’s action space for web interaction.
5.5.3 The Critical Observation Loop
Here’s where computer use agents differ fundamentally from traditional
function-calling agents. When our weather tool returns “sunny, 75°F,” that’s
complete information. But when our agent clicks a button, we need to

@@PAGE 216@@
observe what happened. Did a new page load? Did a form appear? Did an
error message show up?
To enable this, we can add a specific observe_page tool that the LLM can call
to capture both the textual structure and visual appearance of the current
page state.
FunctionTool(
    func=lambda: interface_client.get_state(),
    name="observe_page",
    description="Get current page state and content",
)
When the LLM calls the observe_page tool, our implementation intercepts the
result and enhances it with visual context. This pattern allows the agent to
receive multimodal information combining structured DOM data with
screenshots for richer reasoning.
Listing 5.4: Intercepting observe_page results to add visual context
async def run_stream(self, task, cancellation_token=None, verbose=False):
    # Use base Agent's proven execution loop
    async for item in super().run_stream(
        task, 
        cancellation_token, 
        verbose):
        yield item
        # Intercept observe_page tool results to enhance with screenshots
        if isinstance(item, ToolMessage) and item.tool_name == "observe_page":
            if self.use_screenshots:
                # Capture current page screenshot
                state = await self.interface_client.get_state("hybrid")
                if state.screenshot:
                    # Add screenshot to agent's context for LLM reasoning
                    screenshot_msg = MultiModalMessage(
                        content="Page observation",
                        source=self.name,

@@PAGE 217@@
                        role="user",
                        mime_type="image/png",
                        data=state.screenshot
                    )
                    self.context.add_message(screenshot_msg)
                    yield screenshot_msg  # Also stream for user feedback
This enables our agent to process both text and visual information. When
use_screenshots=True, the agent receives both DOM structure and screenshot
data, allowing it to understand layout, visual cues, and interface states that
are difficult to express in text alone.
5.5.4 Interface State Representation
Our interface client converts raw web page data into formats the LLM can
process effectively. It supports three representation modes, each optimized
for different scenarios and computational constraints.
Listing 5.5: Interface representation modes
async def get_state(self, mode="hybrid"):
    """Get current interface state in specified format."""
    if mode == "text":
        return InterfaceState(
            content=await self.page.content(),
            interactive_elements=await self._get_interactive_elements(),
            screenshot=None
        )
    elif mode == "visual":
        return InterfaceState(
            content="",
            interactive_elements=[],
            screenshot=await self.page.screenshot()
        )
    else:  # hybrid mode
        return InterfaceState(
            content=await self.page.content(),
            interactive_elements=await self._get_interactive_elements(),

@@PAGE 218@@
            screenshot=await self.page.screenshot()
        )
The three modes determine what data gets captured. When using mode="text",
the agent receives HTML content and a list of interactive elements with their
CSS selectors, but no screenshot. This is efficient for token usage but misses
visual context. With mode="visual", only the screenshot is captured, requiring a
multimodal model to process the image. The mode="hybrid" (recommended)
combines both approaches, providing structured data for precise element
targeting through CSS selectors and visual context for understanding
complex layouts and visual relationships. Our DOM filtering focuses on
interactive elements that the agent can meaningfully engage with, reducing
token usage while maintaining essential information.
5.5.5 The Enhanced Execution Flow
With all components in place, let’s see how they work together in a complete
task execution. The core execution loop remains unchanged from our base
agent, but now operates on a web interface action space.
Listing 5.6: Complete ComputerUseAgent execution flow
import asyncio
from picoagents.agents import ComputerUseAgent
from picoagents.llm import OpenAIChatCompletionClient  
from picoagents.agents import PlaywrightWebClient
async def main():
    # Create agent with multimodal reasoning capabilities
    computer_agent = ComputerUseAgent(
        interface_client=PlaywrightWebClient(headless=False),
        model_client=OpenAIChatCompletionClient(model="gpt-4.1-mini"),
        use_screenshots=True,  # Enable visual reasoning
        max_actions=10
    )
    
    try:
        # Task requires navigation, observation, and information extraction

@@PAGE 219@@
        task = "What is the latest AI news on techcrunch.com?"
        
        async for event in computer_agent.run_stream(task):
            print(event)        
    finally:
        await computer_agent.close()  # Clean up browser resources
if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
When you run this code, the agent will open a browser window, navigate to
TechCrunch, observe the page structure, extract relevant headlines, and
return a summary of the latest AI news.
The execution flow demonstrates our key architectural principles in action.
The agent receives a task and uses its inherited tool-calling capabilities to
break it down into actionable steps. Each tool call potentially changes the
interface state, so observation becomes critical. The enhanced observation
loop provides both the structured data needed for precise actions and the
visual context needed for intelligent reasoning.
5.5.6 Resource Management and Error Handling
Computer use agents manage real browser processes and network
connections, making proper resource cleanup essential. Our implementation
includes several layers of protection against resource leaks and graceful
degradation when things go wrong.
Listing 5.7: Robust resource management
class ComputerUseAgent(Agent):
    async def close(self) -> None:
        """Ensure browser cleanup on agent shutdown."""
        if hasattr(self, 'is_initialized') and self.is_initialized:
            await self.interface_client.close()
            self.is_initialized = False
            
    async def run_stream(

@@PAGE 220@@
        self, 
        task, 
        cancellation_token=None, 
        verbose=False):
        # Initialize browser on first use
        if not self.is_initialized:
            await self.interface_client.initialize()
            self.is_initialized = True
            
        try:
            async for item in super().run_stream(
                task, 
                cancellation_token, 
                verbose):
                yield item
        except Exception as e:
            # Log error but don't crash on screenshot failures
            if "screenshot" not in str(e).lower():
                raise  # Re-raise non-screenshot errors
The error handling strategy is particularly important for screenshot capture.
While visual context enhances reasoning, it shouldn’t break task execution if
unavailable. Our implementation gracefully degrades to text-only mode
when screenshot capture fails, ensuring robust operation across different
environments and network conditions.
5.6 Key Challenges in Computer Use
Agents
While computer use agents offer powerful capabilities for automating
complex tasks, they also face several significant challenges. This section
explores the key issues that developers and researchers must address to
create effective and reliable computer use agents. Figure 5.4 illustrates the
interconnected nature of these challenges and their impact on development
and deployment.

@@PAGE 221@@
Figure 5.4: Key challenges in implementing computer use agents. The diagram illustrates five major hurdles: interface representation (balancing detail and efficiency), context and
memory management (maintaining task relevance), action disambiguation (resolving ambiguous targets), security and privacy (protecting sensitive data), and latency (balancing speed
and accuracy). These interconnected challenges highlight the complexity of developing effective and reliable computer use agents for real-world applications.
5.6.1 Interface Representation and Grounding
One of the primary challenges in developing computer use agents is finding
the optimal way to represent and ground the interface state for AI models.
This is crucial for enabling the agent to understand and interact with the
interface effectively.
Text-based representations like the Document Object Model (DOM) for web
interfaces often contain significant amounts of noisy or irrelevant data,

@@PAGE 222@@
which can confuse AI models. These representations also struggle to capture
visual relationships and spatial layouts effectively. Additionally, dynamic
content generated by JavaScript and frequent interface updates pose
challenges for maintaining accurate representations.
Image-based representations, while capable of capturing visual information
more comprehensively, come with their own set of challenges. Processing
images requires significantly more computational resources than text,
potentially increasing latency and reducing responsiveness. Important textual
details, such as exact button labels or input field placeholders, may be harder
to extract from images. Furthermore, variations in screen sizes, resolutions,
and aspect ratios can complicate the interpretation of image-based
representations across different devices.
To address these challenges, researchers are exploring innovative approaches
such as hybrid representations that combine text and image-based methods
to leverage the strengths of both. Advanced grounding techniques like Set-
of-mark prompting (Abuelsaad et al. 2024) enrich representations with
anchor markers, enhancing task performance and reducing ambiguity.
Additionally, specialized models like Ferret-UI (You et al. 2024) and UI-
TARS (Yujia Lu et al. 2025) are being designed specifically for interface
understanding, with UI-TARS demonstrating significant improvements
through training on large-scale GUI screenshot datasets and implementing
System-2 reasoning for deliberate multi-step decision making.
5.6.2 Context and Memory
Computer use agents must maintain a comprehensive understanding of the
user’s context to provide relevant and useful assistance. This involves
learning and remembering individual user preferences across multiple
interactions and tasks, maintaining a record of previous actions and their
outcomes, understanding the current state of the application, and managing
context across various interfaces and environments for tasks that span
multiple applications.
Addressing these challenges requires sophisticated memory management
and context modeling techniques. Potential solutions include implementing
episodic memory systems that can store and retrieve relevant past

@@PAGE 223@@
experiences, developing methods to encode rich contextual information into
compact representations, and creating cross-application knowledge graphs
that capture relationships between various applications and tasks.
5.6.3 Action Disambiguation and Reliability
In many scenarios, computer use agents may encounter multiple potentially
valid action targets for completing a task. Developing robust disambiguation
logic is crucial for ensuring that the agent makes appropriate choices. This
involves determining which action or element is most relevant to the current
task when multiple possibilities exist, developing strategies for handling
ambiguous situations, and balancing autonomy with the need for user input.
Emerging patterns for addressing disambiguation challenges include training
specialized models to rank and prioritize options based on contextual factors,
developing intuitive ways for users to provide feedback and guide the
agent’s decision-making process, and implementing mechanisms for the
agent to assess its own confidence in decisions and seek help when
uncertainty is high. Recent work like UI-TARS demonstrates how iterative
training with reflective online traces can help models learn from their own
interaction history, improving decision-making over time.
5.6.4 Security and Privacy
As computer use agents interact with various applications and handle
sensitive user data, ensuring security and privacy becomes paramount. Key
challenges in this area include safeguarding user information accessed
during automation tasks, securely managing access credentials and
permissions across multiple applications, ensuring compliance with relevant
data protection regulations and application-specific terms of service, and
providing users with clear information about what data the agent can access
and how it is used.
Potential approaches to address these concerns include implementing robust
encryption for all sensitive data handled by the agent, developing systems
that allow users to precisely control what information and capabilities the
agent can access, and creating detailed logs of agent actions to support
transparency and facilitate compliance checks.

@@PAGE 224@@
5.6.5 User Experience: Latency, Responsiveness, and Cost
Computer use agents face significant user experience challenges from
latency and cost management. Complex tasks often require multiple
interactions with AI models, introducing cumulative delays and
compounding costs. Maintaining fluid user experience requires handling
latency in agent actions, managing cases where interface elements change or
time out during processing, and intelligently deciding when to request user
feedback (e.g., ask for login credentials or disambiguate between similar
options) to avoid unnecessary delays or errors.
Cost management deserves special attention in production deployments.
Unlike traditional applications where costs scale linearly, agent token
consumption can spiral as systems make multiple LLM calls per task,
capture and process screenshots, and maintain conversation context across
sessions. Production teams should treat cost as infrastructure, implementing
token budgets per session, monitoring cost-per-task metrics, and using
smaller models for routine operations while reserving larger models for
complex reasoning steps. Screenshot capture represents significant token
cost—consider capturing only when necessary or using text-only
representations for straightforward workflows.
To mitigate latency challenges, researchers and developers are exploring
several strategies. These include creating smaller, faster models specifically
tuned for interface understanding and action prediction, such as multimodal
models optimized for GUI interaction. Other approaches involve
implementing techniques to anticipate and pre-fetch likely next actions,
designing interfaces that provide immediate feedback on agent actions while
processing continues in the background, and structuring agent workflows to
allow for non-blocking operations and parallel processing where possible.
5.6.6 Reliability and Robustness
Ensuring consistent and accurate performance across diverse interfaces and
scenarios remains a significant challenge for computer use agents. This
includes adapting to interface changes, updates, and unexpected elements
like pop-ups or overlays, implementing robust error handling and recovery
mechanisms to gracefully manage unexpected states or failures, and

@@PAGE 225@@
maintaining uniform behavior across various browsers, operating systems,
and device types.
Addressing these challenges requires a multi-faceted approach, including
developing agents that can learn and adapt to interface changes over time,
creating flexible intermediate representations that can handle variations in
interface structure across platforms, and designing automated testing
systems that can evaluate agent performance across a wide range of
scenarios and edge cases. By addressing these challenges, researchers and
developers can work toward creating more robust, reliable, and effective
computer use agents that can seamlessly interact with a wide range of
applications and platforms
5.7 Production Considerations
Deploying computer use agents in production environments requires careful
attention to resource management, security, and performance. This section
outlines practical considerations for building reliable, production-ready
systems.
5.7.1 Resource Management
Computer use agents spawn browser processes that consume significant
memory and must be explicitly closed—Python garbage collection won’t
terminate them automatically. Production deployments should implement
timeout mechanisms to prevent runaway agents, monitor memory usage per
session, and use containerization to enforce resource limits. For concurrent
sessions, track active agents and enforce cleanup policies to prevent resource
exhaustion.
For production deployments, enable headless mode (in PlaywrightWebClient set
headless=True) to reduce resource overhead, capture screenshots only when
needed for decision-making, and use explicit planning for predictable
workflows to minimize LLM calls.
5.7.2 Security and Compliance

@@PAGE 226@@
Security considerations for computer use agents extend beyond typical
application security. These agents access and interact with potentially
sensitive interfaces, handle user credentials, and capture screenshots that
may contain private information. Recent research has revealed that
commercial LLM agents are already vulnerable to simple yet dangerous
attacks (Li et al. 2024), with prompt injection attacks representing a
particularly critical threat vector. Prompt injection attacks (Wang et al. 2025)
occur when malicious instructions embedded in webpage HTML or rendered
content manipulate agent behavior.
Key security threats include credential exposure where agents handling
authentication tokens or cookies can be exploited to impersonate users
across connected systems, supply chain risks from third-party browser
extensions or plugins that can hijack active sessions or exfiltrate data, and
detection challenges where traditional security tools like EDR and DLP
systems struggle to distinguish between legitimate human actions and
potentially malicious agent behaviors.
Key security practices include respecting robots.txt and website terms of
service. Rate limiting prevents overwhelming target servers and reduces the
risk of IP bans or CAPTCHA challenges. Sandboxing agents in isolated
environments limits the blast radius if an agent is compromised or
misbehaves. Data privacy measures must ensure that screenshots and DOM
captures are filtered to avoid capturing and logging sensitive information
like passwords, credit cards, or personal data.
Implementation approaches include filtering captured data before storage to
remove sensitive fields, implementing audit logs that track what interfaces
were accessed without storing the full content, using short-lived credentials
with minimal necessary permissions, and regularly reviewing automation
behavior for compliance with target website policies. Consider requiring
user confirmation for sensitive actions, isolating browser instances per
session, and deploying browser detection and response (BDR) tools designed
specifically for monitoring agent security threats.
5.8 Summary
 

@@PAGE 227@@
When Code and APIs Aren’t Enough: When code execution and APIs
aren’t sufficient, computer use agents enable direct interface interaction
for tasks involving dynamic behaviors, proprietary software without
APIs, and complex visual interfaces requiring human-like navigation
patterns.
Three Core Components Enable Agent Functionality: Computer use
agents consist of action sequence generation (LLMs translating tasks
into interface actions), interface representation (text, visual, or hybrid
approaches), and action execution (browser automation tools like
Playwright for implementing planned actions).
Interface Representation Strategies Offer Different Trade-offs:
Text-based approaches (DOM parsing) provide precise element
targeting but miss visual context, image-based methods capture visual
information but require expensive multimodal processing, while hybrid
approaches combine both for optimal performance.
Implicit vs. Explicit Planning for Action Sequences: Agents generate
action sequences through implicit planning (iterative step-by-step
generation that adapts to dynamic interfaces) or explicit planning
(complete upfront sequences for static, predictable workflows).
Production 
Deployment 
Requires 
Robust 
Error 
Handling:
Successful computer use agents need proper resource management,
security considerations (respecting robots.txt and terms of service),
performance optimization (headless mode, screenshot management),
and reliability patterns for handling interface changes and network
failures.
OceanofPDF.com
